Abstract
Inference-time computation techniques, analogous to human System 2 Thinking,
have recently become popular for improving model performances. However, most
existing approaches suffer from several limitations: they are modality-specific
(e.g., working only in text), problem-specific (e.g., verifiable domains like math
and coding), or require additional supervision/training on top of unsupervised
pretraining (e.g., verifiers or verifiable rewards). In this paper, we ask the question
“Is it possible togeneralize these System 2 Thinking approaches, and develop models
that learn to think solely from unsupervised learning?” Interestingly, we find the
answer is yes, by learning to explicitly verify the compatibility between inputs and
candidate-predictions, and then re-framing prediction problems as optimization
with respect to this verifier. Specifically, we trainEnergy-Based Transformers
(EBTs)—a new class of Energy-Based Models (EBMs)—to assign an energy (un-
normalized probability) value to every input and candidate-prediction pair, enabling
predictions through gradient descent-based energy minimization until convergence.
This formulation enables System 2 Thinking to emerge from unsupervised learn-
ing, making it modality and problem agnostic. Across both discrete (text) and
continuous (visual) modalities, we find EBTs scale faster than the dominant Trans-
former++ approach during training, achieving an up to 35% higher scaling rate with
respect to data, batch size, parameters, FLOPs, and depth. During inference, EBTs
improve performance with System 2 Thinking (i.e., extra computation) by 29%
more than the Transformer++ on language tasks, and EBTs outperform Diffusion
Transformers on image denoising while using fewer forward passes. Further, we
find that System 2 Thinking with EBTs yields larger performance improvements
on data that is farther out-of-distribution, and that EBTs achieve better results than
existing models on most downstream tasks given the same or worse pretraining
performance, suggesting that EBTs generalize better than existing approaches.
Consequently, EBTs are a promising new paradigm for scaling both the learning
and thinking capabilities of models.
1 Introduction
In psychology, human thinking is often classified into two different types: System 1 (thinking fast) and
System 2 (thinking slow) [1–4]. System 1 thinking is characterized by quick, intuitive and automatic
responses, relying on previous experience to solve simple or familiar problems. Alternatively, System
2 Thinking is slow, deliberate and analytical, requiring conscious effort and logical reasoning to
process more complex information. System 2 Thinking is essential for complex problems that go
Correspondence to Alexi Gladstone: /envel⌢pealexigladstone@gmail.com. †Work does not relate to position at
Amazon.
Preprint. Under review.
(a) AR Transformer
 (b) RNN
 (c) Diffusion Transformer
 (d) EBT
Existing Autoregressive Approaches
Figure 1: Autoregressive Architecture Comparison. (a) Autoregressive (AR) Transformer is the
most common, with (b) RNNs becoming more popular recently [22, 23]. (c) Diffusion Transform-
ers [26] (which are often bidirectional but can also be autoregressive) are the most similar to EBT,
being able to dynamically allocate computation during inference, but predict the noise rather than the
energy [27, 28]. Consequently, diffusion models cannot give unnormalized likelihood estimates at
each step of the thinking process, and are not trained as explicit verifiers, unlike EBTs.
beyond automatic pattern recognition, such as in mathematics, programming, multistep reasoning, or
novel out-of-distribution situations [5, 6], where precision and depth of understanding are important.
Although current models perform well on tasks suitable for System 1 thinking [7], they continue to
struggle with tasks that demand System 2 capabilities [8–10].
Consequently, the recent pursuance of System 2 Thinking capabilities has become a growing interest
among AI researchers, leading to the rise of several foundation models such as O1 [ 11], R1 [12],
Grok3 [13], and Claude 3.7 Sonnet [ 14]. These “reasoning models” excel on math and coding
benchmarks, particularly by increasing the time models spend thinking. However, publicly available
information on training methods, particularly from the open-source R1 model [ 12], suggests that
the Reinforcement Learning (RL) based training approach for these models only works in domains
where rule-based rewards can easily verify answers, such as math and coding. This limitation reduces
applicability to a small range of problem types, and as a consequence, often deteriorates performance
in other tasks such as writing [ 15–17]. Further, recent evidence suggests this RL-based approach
may not induce new reasoning patterns, but rather just increase the probability of reasoning patterns
already known to the base model [18], which limits performance on problems requiring exploration.
Along similar lines, there has been strong interest in achieving System 2 Thinking in both diffusion
models and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Diffusion models support iterative inference
through denoising steps, where increasing denoising steps can improve performance. However,
they typically fail to benefit from denoising steps beyond what they were trained on [19], and aside
from increasing denoising steps, diffusion models require an external verifier to improve System 2
Thinking capabilities [19–21]. RNNs also offer iterative computation via recurrent state updates [22–
24], however, most modern RNNs only update their internal state with new information, meaning
they cannot be used for thinking longer. Additionally, RNNs that do support recurrent depth still lack
mechanisms for explicit verification [25], resulting in limited adoption for System 2 Thinking.
As one of the primary goals of AI is to figure out how we can create systems that learn to think
on their own on any type of problem, these approaches ultimately bring about the following core
research question: “Can we rely entirely on unsupervised learning to develop System 2 Thinking?”
Such a capability would enable generalization of current System 2 Thinking approaches to any
problem, any modality, and avoid the reliance on external human, reward, or model supervision.
In this work, we argue and demonstrate empirically that the answer to this core research question
is yes, but that there are several limitations in existing model architectures that prevent this type
of unsupervised System 2 Thinking from emerging. Particularly, when comparing the qualities of
human System 2 Thinking with the current modeling paradigms (Figure 1, Table 1), we observe
several key differences, outlined below as three key Facets of System 2 Thinking1:
1We acknowledge that these are not comprehensive for achieving System 2 Thinking, but rather, a good first
step (more info is in Section C.1).
2
Table 1: Architectures and Cognitive Facets. For each prediction, Feed Forward (FF) Transformers
and RNNs generally2 have a finite amount of computation. While diffusion models have potentially
more computation during inference by increasing the number of denoising steps, they do not learn
to explicitly verify or estimate uncertainty for predictions. EBMs can use a dynamic amount of
computation during inference by iterating for any number of steps, and give an energy scalar that can
be used to evaluate uncertainty and verify the strength of predictions.
Architecture Dynamic Compute
Allocation (Facet 1)
Modeling
Uncertainty (Facet 2)
Prediction
Verification (Facet 3)
FF Transformers ✗ ✗ ✗
RNNs ✗ ✗ ✗
Diffusion Transformers ✓ ✗ ✗
EBTs ✓ ✓ ✓
Facet 1: Dynamic Allocation of Computation. Humans naturally allocate varying amounts of
effort to different tasks depending on difficulty, which is widely supported by psychology and
neuroscience [1, 31, 32]. As the difficulty of tasks humans face varies widely, the ability to adjust
the magnitude of computational resources allocated towards a task is fundamental to success.3 For
example, a decision regarding whether to change careers generally takes people much more time than
deciding what to eat for lunch.
Facet 2: Modeling Uncertainty in Continuous State Spaces. While thinking longer is important
for improving performance, humans also weigh how uncertain they are before committing to a
decision. In language, LLMs can simulate this through token-level probabilities [33]. In the context
of continuous state spaces, such as in vision, without the usage of discretization schemes such as
Vector Quantization [34] or pseudo losses/objectives (such as ELBO [35]), standard implementations
of the most successfully used approaches with Transformers, RNNs, or Diffusion models generally do
not provide strong or reliable uncertainty estimates [36–39].4 EBMs can naturally model uncertainty
without having to model exact likelihoods by modeling the relative unnormalized likelihoods of
predictions [42], as demonstrated in Figure 3. As the real world often contains many inherently
unpredictable elements, for instance, when a pedestrian might emerge from behind a parked vehicle,
the ability to express uncertainty in predictions is essential to being cautious, and is a natural capability
of humans [43–45].
Facet 3: Verification of Predictions.In addition to allocating computation and modeling uncertainty,
effective thinking also benefits from the ability to verify predictions, which can guide decisions about
when to stop thinking or to select the most accurate predictions. There is strong evidence that such
verification is a core component of human thinking [46, 47]. In fact, it can be shown that verifying
solutions is exponentially easier than generating solutions [48], which means that verifiers can often
generalize better than explicit generators [48]. Training an explicit verifier means that at each step of
the thinking process an estimate of the current prediction’s quality can be extracted. This supports
more dynamic inference time behavior such as early stopping when a prediction is known to be
correct or allocating more compute when a problem is difficult, which can intuitively be seen as
adjusting resources according to the difficulty of a problem [ 1]. Training an explicit verifier also
allows for capabilities such as Monte Carlo Tree Search [49] or sampling many times and choosing
the best prediction, which traditionally have involved training new models on more data [19, 50].
For more information on additional Facets, please refer to Section F.
2Recent works attempt to enable dynamic computation per prediction [ 25, 29, 30], but these approaches
are generally not modality agnostic and have not been widely adopted. While RNNs can theoretically support
dynamic computation, they are typically updated only with new state information, except in specialized cases
such as in [25].
3It’s important to note that we refer to this dynamic computation capability at the granularity of each
prediction being made, meaning current LLMs built with traditional AR transformers/RNNs cannot dynamically
allocate compute per token generated as they have a finite depth/width and are only updated with new text tokens.
Please check Section G for more information.
4We acknowledge that there are approaches to achieve uncertainty with the models discussed, such as Mixture
Density Networks [40] as well as score-based diffusion models [41]. However, these approaches have seen less
widespread success and scalability than the current dominant approaches.
3
Figure 2: EBT for Autoregressive Modeling. Each blue box corresponds to a different prediction
based on the current step of the thinking process, where the initial prediction starts as random. At
each step, a new prediction is fed into the model, which gives an energy scalar for the prediction’s
current compatibility (unnormalized likelihood) with the context (Facets 2 and 3). Then, the gradient
of th