Abstract
Event temporal reasoning aims at identifying
the temporal relations between two or more
events from narratives. However, knowledge
conflicts arise when there is a mismatch be-
tween the actual temporal relations of events in
the context and the prior knowledge or biases
learned by the model. In this paper, we propose
to detect knowledge-conflict examples in event
temporal reasoning using bias indicators, which
include event relation prior bias, tense bias,
narrative bias, and dependency bias. We define
conflict examples as those where event rela-
tions are opposite to biased or prior relations.
To mitigate event-related knowledge conflicts,
we introduce a Counterfactual Data Augmenta-
tion (CDA) based method that can be applied to
both Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) and
Large Language Models (LLMs) either as ad-
ditional training data or demonstrations for In-
Context Learning. Experiments suggest both
PLMs and LLMs suffer from knowledge con-
flicts in event temporal reasoning, and CDA
has the potential for reducing hallucination and
improving model performance1.
1 Introduction
An important goal of event understanding is to iden-
tify the temporal relations ( TEMP RELS) among
events described in natural language text (Cham-
bers et al., 2007). This task aligns with human’s
cognitive ability (Zacks and Tversky, 2001; Za-
cks et al., 2007), which often involves routinely
reasoning about how events happening around us
are temporally sequenced, planned, and lead to
consequences and decisions (Schank and Abelson,
1977). From the intelligent system perspective, it
also benefits many NLP applications for narrative
understanding (Li et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2022),
schema induction (Li et al., 2021), and question
answering (Zhu et al., 2017; Stricker, 2021).
1Code and data are available at https://github.com/
tqfang/event-temporal-knowledge-conflict
Corpus Statistics:Count(see, before, sick): 3Count(see, after, sick):   8see the doctor happens [MASK]sick.before: 5.8×10!"after: 7.0×10!"[MASK]
ChatGPT:
I went to e1: seethe doctor. However, I was more seriously e2: sick.Q: the temporal relation between e1 and e2?A: before
PLM: 
Bias Indicators (Prior Knowledge in the Corpus or LM)
Q: select the correct temporal relation. 1. Seeing a doctor happens before sick.  2. Seeing a doctor happens after sick. A: The correct temporal relation is: 2. Seeing a doctor happens aftersick. 
Knowledge-Conflict Example
I went to e1: seethe doctor because I was seriously e2: sick.Q: the temporal relation between e1 and e2?A: after
Normal Example
Figure 1: An example of a knowledge-conflict instance.
The actual TEMP REL in the context differs from the
biased or prior TEMP REL in the corpus and the language
model, leading to the emergence of knowledge conflicts.
In event temporal reasoning, the input includes
two parts, the event mentions and the context. The
TEMP REL a model seeks to infer should be based
on the context, rather than only revealed by the
event mentions themselves. For example, in Fig. 1,
without a context, the event mention see (the doc-
tor) and sick have certain temporal prior where
see the doctor statistically happen more often after
sick, either by corpus statistics or probing a masked
PLM. However, under the context of “I went to see
the doctor, However, I was more seriously sick,”
we can infer that see happens before sick instead of
after due to the presence of the connectiveHowever.
This is known as the phenomenon of knowledge
conflicts (Longpre et al., 2021), where the contex-
tual information contradicts the knowledge memo-
rized by the language model. Hence, the essential
requirement for accountable temporal reasoning
is context-faithfulness (Wang et al., 2023b; Zhou
et al., 2023), where models are expected to perform
reasoning based on the context instead of guessing
using only the prior knowledge about the events
arXiv:2305.14970v2  [cs.CL]  8 Apr 2024
encoded in their parameters.
However, most current language models, includ-
ing both Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) and
Large Language Models (LLMs) 2, rely on short-
cuts from the mentions without being faithful to
the context (Xu et al., 2022; Bender et al., 2021) to
varying degrees, leading to hallucination. This is-
sue is particularly severe in contexts where event or
entity mentions have a different relation prior than
what is presented in the context. Though entity-
related knowledge conflicts (Longpre et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2022a; Li et al., 2022) have recently
attracted much attention, questions about event-
related knowledge conflicts remained intact.
First, it is necessary to understand the con-
flicts regarding relations of events, which is more
complicated than that of a single event. Second,
the substitution-based paradigm defined in entity
knowledge conflicts or spurious correlation detec-
tion (Longpre et al., 2021) cannot be directly ap-
plied to events. Entity mentions can often be re-
placed randomly with other entities with the same
typing to study the faithfulness towards the con-
text other than the entity mention, which remains
unchanged after the replacement. For example,
in open-domain QA, a possible question can be
“Who is the CEO of Twitter?” based on the context
“Yaccarino succeeded Elon Musk as the CEO of
Twitter”. To check whether models faithfully rely
on the context instead of hallucinating, Yaccarino
in the context can be changed to a random name to
see if the model can still output the “correct” CEO
instead of Yaccarino as they have learned in pre-
training. However, events are usually denoted by
predicates in the context (Bethard et al., 2007), and
directly substituting the predicate (e.g., from see
in Fig. 1 to another random verb such as play) will
alter the semantic meaning of the whole context,
including both the predicate and its dependency
with the arguments, making it infeasible to analyze
the faithfulness towards the original context. Thus,
instead of resorting to a substitution, in this paper,
we study the effect of knowledge conflicts in event
temporal reasoning by selecting conflict examples
from the original dataset based on corpus statistics,
and evaluate models on the conflict subsets.
We outline the contributions of this paper as
follows. First, we define four types of bias that
2PLMs, or smaller models, are used in a pre-train and fine-
tune paradigm, while LLMs, larger and more powerful models
with over 10B parameters, are commonly employed through
in-context learning (Sun, 2023).
can lead to knowledge conflicts, including event-
relation bias, narrative bias, tense bias, and depen-
dency bias. The data instances where the actual
TEMP REL contradicts with the prior TEMP REL are
referred to as knowledge-conflict instances (§3), as
they conflict with the prior knowledge provided to
language models. Second, to mitigate the effect of
knowledge conflicts, we propose a Counterfactual
Data Augmentation (CDA) technique that explic-
itly generates contexts with knowledge-conflict el-
ements, thereby reducing the overall bias in the
data distribution. CDA can be applied to both
fine-tuned PLMs and LLMs with (test-time) in-
context learning (§3.3). Third, we study the effect
of various kinds of knowledge conflicts and our pro-
posed bias mitigation method on two popular event
temporal reasoning benchmarks, TORQUE (Ning
et al., 2020) and MATRES (Ning et al., 2018). We
show that models suffer from performance drop
on knowledge-conflict subsets, and our bias-aware
data augmentation method outperforms baselines
by a remarkable margin on both bias mitigation
and overall performance (§4).
2 Related Works
Event Temporal Reasoning. Event temporal
reasoning aims at identifying the temporal relations
(TEMP REL) of events in narratives. There are two
common ways of formulating this problem. The
first formulation is the TEMP REL extraction task,
which involves determining theTEMP REL between
two annotated event triggers from a pre-defined re-
lation set (Bethard et al., 2007, 2017; Ning et al.,
2018; Naik et al., 2019). Meanwhile, another for-
mulation is a reading comprehension task, which in-
volves determining more complicated TEMP RELS
expressed in natural language questions (Ning et al.,
2020; Han et al., 2021). To conduct event tempo-
ral reasoning, literature has leveraged various ap-
proaches, including graph neural networks (Zhang
et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022), rhetorical discourse
features and temporal arguments from semantic
role labels (Mathur et al., 2021), distant supervi-
sion (Zhou et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021), and
event relation joint learning (Wang et al., 2020,
2023c, 2022b). LLMs such as GPT3 (Brown et al.,
2020) and ChatGPT are also leveraged for event
temporal reasoning (Chan et al., 2023) with care-
fully designed prompts and In-Context Learning.
Our work differs from previous studies in that we
study the knowledge conflicts in event temporal
reasoning and how to mitigate them.
Knowledge Conflict in Language Models.
Knowledge conflicts have been widely studied for
entity-centric NLU tasks (Schuster et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2024). For example, Longpre et al.
(2021) studied the knowledge conflict in open-
domain question answering using entity substi-
tution. Li et al. (2022) also adopted this strat-
egy to study the enhancement of a PLM’s robust-
ness against context noise with a knowledge-aware
working memory. Schuster et al. (2021) proposed
a dataset using the user edits in Wikipedia as subtle
changes for the context and study the effect of such
changes on language models. Xu et al. (2022) sys-
tematically formulate six types of biases in entity
typing to study spurious correlations. Certain types
of biases, such as Mention-Context and Named
Entity bias, can reflect knowledge conflicts in en-
tities. Typical mitigation methods of knowledge
conflicts include causal analysis and coutnerfactual
analysis (Wang et al., 2023a, 2022a), and test-time-
only LLM prompting methods using counterfactual
demonstration and opinion-based prompting (Zhou
et al., 2023). However, the knowledge conflicts of
event-event TEMP RELS are under-explored. Feng
et al. (2022) proposed a dataset studying the differ-
ential effects of TEMP REL reasoning given addi-
tional contexts, while their focus is on annotating
additional out-of-distribution data instead of explor-
ing existing knowledge conflicts within the dataset.
Our work systematically defines and detects knowl-
edge conflicts in event temporal reasoning and pro-
poses a data-augmentation-based method to miti-
gate those conflicts based on the detected bias.
3 Event Knowledge Conflict
We introduce the problem definition (§3.1) and
formally define four types of bias and how to select
knowledge-conflict data (§3.2). We then introduce
our proposed Counterfactual Data Augmentation
for mitigating knowledge conflict (§3.3).
3.1 Problem Definition
In event temporal reasoning, the primary objective
is to determine the TEMP REL between two or more
events. Without the loss of generality, our study is
based on pairwise event relations: the relation r of
an event pair (e1, e2) based on the context c. More
complex cases can be easily addressed by breaking
down the relations involving multiple events into
pairwise relations. For example, in TORQUE, a
question might be formulated as “what happens
before e?”, where e can be a target event trigger.
Then, the answers ea1, ea2, · · · can form multiple
event pairs (e, before, eai), where i = 1, 2, · · ·, etc.
The case where evaluating the temporal status of
a single event (happened, happening, will happen,
etc.) can also be easily adapted in this framework
by replacing the features of event pairs to a single
event.
To study event-related knowledge conflict, we
create an automated framework to use corpus
co-occurrence statistics to select conflict subsets.
Similar to the co-occurrence statistics in report-
ing bias (Gordon and Durme, 2013), to obtain
knowledge-conflict data, we first d