Abstract. The current state-of-the-art in artiﬁcial intelligence is impressive, especially in terms of
mastery of language, but not so much in terms of mathematical reasoning. What could be missing?
Can we learn something useful about that gap from how the brai ns of mathematicians go about
their craft? This essay builds on the idea that current deep l earning mostly succeeds at system
1 abilities – which correspond to our intuition and habitual behaviors – but still lacks something
important regarding system 2 abilities – which include reas oning and robust uncertainty estimation.
It takes an information-theoretical posture to ask questio ns about what constitutes an interesting
mathematical statement, which could guide future work in cr afting an AI mathematician. The focus
is not on proving a given theorem but on discovering new and in teresting conjectures. The central
hypothesis is that a desirable body of theorems better summa rizes the set of all provable statements,
for example by having a small description length while at the same time being close (in terms of
number of derivation steps) to many provable statements.
1. Context
Research in artiﬁcial intelligence has advanced in tremend ous and even scary [Russell, 2019] ways
in the last couple of decades, fueled by research on deep lear ning [Bengio et al., 2021]. Modern
generative AI systems are particularly impressive because they show an ability to create realistic
new content: images, sounds, and text, for example. These systems are de ep neural networks:
functions used to represent a conditional distribution P (Y |X) over values of a random variable Y ,
representing content, given the value of a random variable X, representing context or input. The
input X could, for example, be a natural language query while the out put Y could be a text, an
image, or a video. Many of these systems are eﬀectively regres sion models ﬁt to a set of training
examples (x, y). The distinguishing feature of deep learning is that the nu mber of degrees of freedom
in the regression is very large, sometimes billions or trill ions of parameters. A generative neural
network can sample Y given X from the learned distribution and then use it as part of the ne xt
input. In the case of large language models (LLMs), Y is the next word that follows textual context
X, and the iterated applications of such a generator can be use d to form a dialogue with LLMs
like ChatGPT [OpenAI, 2022, 2023]. A pre-training phase [Be ngio et al., 2021] may exploit larger
datasets where we observe only inputs x or a combination of unlabeled ( x only) and labeled (( x, y)
pairs) data, or where the training objective is less targete d to a speciﬁc task and more towards
capturing the statistical structure in some or all of the ran dom variables of interest.
What is surprising is how successful such approaches have be en when the number of training
examples and parameters are both scaled up, in spite of the fa irly simple principles involved. For
example, GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023] is believed to have about a tri llion parameters trained with more
than a trillion examples (of predicting the next word Y in the context of a piece of text X).
In addition to raw scale of the models and datasets, some of th e ingredients of that success are
algorithmic: training the whole thing by stochastic gradie nt descent [Bottou, 2010] (i.e., updating
the parameters in the direction of improving the training ob jective for just a random subset of
examples, and repeating this many many times), the use of lea rned vectorial representations for each
word [Bengio et al., 2001] or more generally for symbols [Hin ton and Plaut, 1987], the “deep learning”
idea [LeCun et al., 2015] of stacking many layers of jointly t rained non-linear transformations, the
1
2 YOSHUA BENGIO AND NIKOLAY MALKIN
learnable non-linear computations inspired by human atten tion [Bahdanau et al., 2014] mechanisms,
focusing computations on a few elements of a set at a time (by g iving them a larger weight), or the
extension of this attention mechanism to attend to multiple elements in parallel and stack these
attention layers, also known as the popular Transformer [Va swani et al., 2017] architecture.
We now have AI systems that seem to master language. What is mi ssing in order to achieve
the kind of mathematical thinking abilities that many of us e njoy? Could we build an AI system
that could one day surpass our mathematical abilities? Thes e are the questions motivating the
discussions below, with an emphasis on connecting the curre nt state-of-the-art in deep learning to
human-level reasoning and mathematical skills.
The main question we aim at is the following: what could serve as a training objective for
mathematical discovery? We propose an information-theore tic answer: one would prefer a library
of mathematical statements that is small while making it eas y to prove many provable statements.
We also consider the exploratory process of generating conj ectures based on such an objective and
then using a goal-conditioned machine learning approach to try proving them by generating subgoals
corresponding to lemmas.
This paper can be read as an initial answer from a machine lear ning expert to a graduate student
who would like to explore machine learning methods to build a n AI mathematician, one that could
not only search for proofs or disproofs of conjectures but al so generate interesting new conjectures.