ABSTRACT
Lots of learning tasks require dealing with graph data which contains rich relation information among elements.
Modeling physics systems, learning molecular ﬁngerprints, predicting protein interface, and classifying diseases
demand a model to learn from graph inputs. In other domains such as learning from non-structural data like texts
and images, reasoning on extracted structures (like the dependency trees of sentences and the scene graphs of
images) is an important research topic which also needs graph reasoning models. Graph neural networks (GNNs)
are neural models that capture the dependence of graphs via message passing between the nodes of graphs. In
recent years, variants of GNNs such as graph convolutional network (GCN), graph attention network (GAT), graph
recurrent network (GRN) have demonstrated ground-breaking performances on many deep learning tasks. In this
survey, we propose a general design pipeline for GNN models and discuss the variants of each component, sys-
tematically categorize the applications, and propose four open problems for future research.
1. Introduction
Graphs are a kind of data structure which models a set of objects
(nodes) and their relationships (edges). Recently, researches on
analyzing graphs with machine learning have been receiving more and
more attention because of the great expressive power of graphs, i.e.
graphs can be used as denotation of a large number of systems across
various areas including social science (social networks ( Wu et al., 2020 ),
natural science (physical systems ( Sanchez et al., 2018 ; Battaglia et al.,
2016) and protein-protein interaction networks ( Fout et al., 2017 )),
knowledge graphs ( Hamaguchi et al., 2017 ) and many other research
areas ( Khalil et al., 2017 ). As a unique non-Euclidean data structure for
machine learning, graph analysis focuses on tasks such as node classi ﬁ-
cation, link prediction, and clustering. Graph neural networks (GNNs) are
deep learning based methods that operate on graph domain. Due to its
convincing performance, GNN has become a widely applied graph
analysis method recently. In the following paragraphs, we will illustrate
the fundamental motivations of graph neural networks.
The ﬁrst motivation of GNNs roots in the long-standing history of
neural networks for graphs. In the nineties, Recursive Neural Networks
are ﬁrst utilized on directed acyclic graphs ( Sperduti and Starita, 1997 ;
Frasconi et al., 1998 ). Afterwards, Recurrent Neural Networks and
Feedforward Neural Networks are introduced into this literature
respectively in ( Scarselli et al., 2009 ) and ( Micheli, 2009 ) to tackle cy-
cles. Although being successful, the universal idea behind these methods
is building state transition systems on graphs and iterate until conver-
gence, which constrained the extendability and representation ability.
Recent advancement of deep neural networks, especially convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) ( LeCun et al., 1998 ) result in the rediscovery of
GNNs. CNNs have the ability to extract multi-scale localized spatial
features and compose them to construct highly expressive representa-
tions, which led to breakthroughs in almost all machine learning areas
and started the new era of deep learning ( LeCun et al., 2015). The keys of
CNNs are local connection, shared weights and the use of multiple layers
(LeCun et al., 2015 ). These are also of great importance in solving
problems on graphs. However, CNNs can only operate on regular
Euclidean data like images (2D grids) and texts (1D sequences) while
these data structures can be regarded as instances of graphs. Therefore, it
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: zhoujie18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn (J. Zhou), cgq19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn (G. Cui), hsd20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn (S. Hu), zy-z19@mails.
tsinghua.edu.cn (Z. Zhang), albertyang33@gmail.com (C. Yang), liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn (Z. Liu), fandywang@tencent.com (L. Wang), harrychli@tencent.com
(C. Li), sms@tsinghua.edu.cn (M. Sun).
1 indicates equal contribution.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
AI Open
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/ai-open
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.01.001
Received 16 September 2020; Received in revised form 15 December 2020; Accepted 27 January 2021
Available online 8 April 2021
2666-6510/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
i An update to this article is included at the end
is straightforward to generalize CNNs on graphs. As shown in Fig. 1,i ti s
hard to de ﬁne localized convolutional ﬁlters and pooling operators,
which hinders the transformation of CNN from Euclidean domain to
non-Euclidean domain. Extending deep neural models to non-Euclidean
domains, which is generally referred to as geometric deep learning, has
been an emerging research area ( Bronstein et al., 2017 ). Under this
umbrella term, deep learning on graphs receives enormous attention.
The other motivation comes from graph representation learning (Cui
et al., 2018a; Hamilton et al., 2017b; Zhang et al., 2018a; Cai et al., 2018;
Goyal and Ferrara, 2018 ), which learns to represent graph nodes, edges
or subgraphs by low-dimensional vectors. In the ﬁeld of graph analysis,
traditional machine learning approaches usually rely on hand engineered
features and are limited by its in ﬂexibility and high cost. Following the
idea of representation learning and the success of word embedding
(Mikolov et al., 2013 ), DeepWalk ( Perozzi et al., 2014 ), regarded as the
ﬁrst graph embedding method based on representation learning, applies
SkipGram model ( Mikolov et al., 2013 ) on the generated random walks.
Similar approaches such as node2vec ( Grover and Leskovec, 2016), LINE
(Tang et al., 2015 ) and TADW ( Yang et al., 2015 ) also achieved break-
throughs. However, these methods suffer from two severe drawbacks
(Hamilton et al., 2017b ). First, no parameters are shared between nodes
in the encoder, which leads to computationally inef ﬁciency, since it
means the number of parameters grows linearly with the number of
nodes. Second, the direct embedding methods lack the ability of gener-
alization, which means they cannot deal with dynamic graphs or
generalize to new graphs.
Based on CNNs and graph embedding, variants of graph neural net-
works (GNNs) are proposed to collectively aggregate information from
graph structure. Thus they can model input and/or output consisting of
elements and their dependency.
There exists several comprehensive reviews on graph neural net-
works. Bronstein et al. (2017) provide a thorough review of geometric
deep learning, which presents its problems, dif ﬁculties, solutions, ap-
plications and future directions. Zhang et al. (2019a) propose another
comprehensive overview of graph convolutional networks. However,
they mainly focus on convolution operators de ﬁned on graphs while we
investigate other computation modules in GNNs such as skip connections
and pooling operators.
Papers by Zhang et al. (2018b), Wu et al. (2019a), Chami et al. (2020)
are the most up-to-date survey papers on GNNs and they mainly focus on
models of GNN. Wu et al. (2019a) categorize GNNs into four groups:
recurrent graph neural networks, convolutional graph neural networks,
graph autoencoders, and spatial-temporal graph neural networks. Zhang
et al. (2018b) give a systematic overview of different graph deep learning
methods and Chami et al. (2020) propose a Graph Encoder Decoder
Model to unify network embedding and graph neural network models.
Our paper provides a different taxonomy with them and we mainly focus
on classic GNN models. Besides, we summarize variants of GNNs for
different graph types and also provide a detailed summary of GNNs ’
applications in different domains.
There have also been several surveys focusing on some speci ﬁc graph
learning ﬁelds. Sun et al. (2018) and Chen et al. (2020a) give detailed
overviews for adversarial learning methods on graphs, including graph
data attack and defense. Lee et al. (2018a) provide a review over graph
attention models. The paper proposed by Yang et al. (2020) focuses on
heterogeneous graph representation learning, where nodes or edges are
of multiple types. Huang et al. (2020) review over existing GNN models
for dynamic graphs. Peng et al. (2020) summarize graph embeddings
methods for combinatorial optimization. We conclude GNNs for het-
erogeneous graphs, dynamic graphs and combinatorial optimization in
Section 4.2, Section 4.3, and Section 8.1.6 respectively.
In this paper, we provide a thorough review of different graph neural
network models as well as a systematic taxonomy of the applications. To
summarize, our contributions are:
/C15 We provide a detailed review over existing graph neural network
models. We present a general design pipeline and discuss the variants
of each module. We also introduce researches on theoretical and
empirical analyses of GNN models.
/C15 We systematically categorize the applications and divide the appli-
cations into structural scenarios and non-structural scenarios. We
present several major applications and their corresponding methods
for each scenario.
/C15 We propose four open problems for future research. We provide a
thorough analysis of each problem and propose future research
directions.
The rest of this survey is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present
a general GNN design pipeline. Following the pipeline, we discuss each
step in detail to review GNN model variants. The details are included in
Section 3 to Section 6. In Section 7, we revisit research works over
theoretical and empirical analyses of GNNs. In Section 8, we introduce
several major applications of graph neural networks applied to structural
scenarios, non-structural scenarios and other scenarios. In Section 9,w e
propose four open problems of graph neural networks as well as several
future research directions. And ﬁnally, we conclude the survey in Section
10.