Abstract
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) have been introduced as a method to sample a
diverse set of candidates in an active learning context, with a training objective that makes
them approximately sample in proportion to a given reward function. In this paper, we
show a number of additional theoretical properties of GFlowNets, including a new local and
efficient training objective called detailed balance for the analogy with MCMC. GFlowNets
can be used to estimate joint probability distributions and the corresponding marginal dis-
tributions where some variables are unspecified and, of particular interest, can represent
distributions over composite objects like sets and graphs. GFlowNets amortize the work
typically done by computationally expensive MCMC methods in a single but trained gen-
erative pass. They could also be used to estimate partition functions and free energies,
conditional probabilities of supersets (supergraphs) given a subset (subgraph), as well as
marginal distributions over all supersets (supergraphs) of a given set (graph). We intro-
duce variations enabling the estimation of entropy and mutual information, sampling from
a Pareto frontier, connections to reward-maximizing policies, and extensions to stochastic
environments, continuous actions and modular energy functions.
1 Introduction
Building upon the introduction of Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) by Bengio et al.
(2021), we provide here an in-depth formal foundation and expansion of the set of theoretical
results in ways that may be of interest for the active learning scenario of Bengio et al. (2021)
but also much more broadly.
∗. Equal Contribution
©2023 Yoshua Bengio, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Edward J. Hu, Mo Tiwari, Emmanuel Bengio.
License: CC-BY 4.0, seehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are
provided athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v24/22-0364.html.
arXiv:2111.09266v5  [cs.LG]  24 Jan 2026
Bengio, Lahlou, Deleu, Hu, Tiwari, Bengio
1.1 What is a GFlowNet ?
GFlowNets have properties which make them well-suited to perform amortized probabilistic
inference in general, whether for sampling or for marginalizing. Sampling takes place at
training time while run-time sampling or computations of marginalized quantities can be
done in a single pass through a sequence of constructive stochastic steps. This makes
GFlowNets an interesting alternative to Monte-Carlo Markov chains (MCMC) and related
to amortized variational inference (Malkin et al., 2023).
Because sampling of a compositional objectscan be achieved through a sequence of
stochastic steps, very rich multimodal distributionsP T (s) over such objects can be repre-
sented, and the offline training objectives make it possible to explore and discover modes of
the distribution of interest. The key property of GFlowNets is that their sampling policy is
trained to make the probabilityP T (s) of sampling an objectsapproximately proportional
to the valueR(s) of a given reward function applied to that object. We also talk of an en-
ergy functionE(s) =−logR(s), i.e., the reward function is non-negative and corresponds
to an unnormalized probability. Whereas one typically trains a generative model from a
dataset of positive examples, a GFlowNet is trained to match the given energy or reward
function and convert it into a sampler. We view that sampler as a generative policy because
the composite objectsis constructed through a sequence of smaller stochastic steps (see
Fig. 1), often corresponding to constructively composing different elements ofs, like the
edges of a graph.
This conversion of an energy function or unnormalized probability function to a sampler
is similar to what MCMC methods achieve but once trained, GFlowNets will generate a
sample in one shot instead of generating a long sequence of samples whose distribution would
gradually approach the desired one. GFlowNets thus avoid the lengthy stochastic search in
the space of such objects and the associated mode-mixing intractability challenge of MCMC
methods (Jasra et al., 2005; Bengio et al., 2013; Pompe et al., 2020). Multiple iid samples
can be obtained from the GFlowNet by calling the sampler multiple times. GFlowNets
exchange that intractability of sampling with MCMC for the challenge of amortized training
of the generative policy. The latter problem would be equally intractable if the modes of the
reward function did not have a inherent (but not necessarily known) structure over which
the learner could generalize, i.e., the learner had almost no chance to correctly guess where
to find new modes based on (i.e., training on) those it had already visited.
The energy function or reward function (exponential of minus energy) is evaluated only
at the end of the sequential construction process for objectss, in what we call a terminating
state. Every such constructive sequence starts in the single initial states 0 and ends in a
terminal state. As illustrated in Figure 2, we can visualize the set of all trajectories starting
froms 0 and ending in a terminal states. The term ”flow” in ”generative flow networks”
refers to unnormalized probabilities that can be learned by GFlowNet learning procedures.
The flow in an intermediate statesis a weighted sum of the non-negative rewards of the
terminating states reachable froms. Those weights are such as to avoid double-counting:
if we were to inject a fixed flow of liquid ins 0 and dispatch that liquid in each child of any
statesproportionally to the GFlowNet policy for choosing a child ofs, we would obtain
the flow at each state and the flow at terminating states would match the reward function
at those states. As shown in greater detail here and for the first time in the first GFlowNet
2
GFlowNet Foundations
asdf
st = 1
2
3
GFlowNetPF π(A|st)
drawat∼π(A|st)
at = “Add a new node
connected to node 2”
T (st,a t) determines st+1
st+1 = 1
2
3
4 GFlowNetPF π(A|st+1) drawat+1∼π(A|st+1)
at+1 = “. . . ”
Figure 1: A diagram of how a GFlowNet iteratively constructs an object. We adopt notation
that is common in the reinforcement learning literature:s t represents the state of the
partially constructed object (in this case, a graph) at timet,a t represents the action taken
by the GFlowNet at timetto transition to states t+1 =T(s t, at). In this diagram, the
GFlowNet takes a 3-node graph as input and determines an action to take. The action,
combined with the environment transition functionT(s t, at), determiness t+1: a four-node
graph. This process repeats until an exit action is sampled and the sample is complete.
paper (Bengio et al., 2021), this can be achieved with a flow constraint at each state: the
sum of incoming flows must match the sum of outgoing flows.
1.2 Contributions of this paper
In this paper, an important contribution is the notion ofconditionalGFlowNet, which en-
ables estimation of intractable sums corresponding to marginalization over many steps of
object construction, and can thus be used to compute free energies 1 over different types
of joint distributions, perhaps most interestingly over sets and graphs. This marginaliza-
tion also enables estimation of entropies, conditional entropies and mutual information.
GFlowNets can thus be generalized to estimate multiple flows corresponding to modeling a
rich outcome (rather than a scalar reward function) .
We refer the reader to Bengio et al. (2021) and Sec. 7 for a discussion of related ap-
proaches and differences with common generative models and reinforcement learning (RL)
methods. In an RL context, two interesting properties of GFlowNets already noted in that
paper are that they (1) can be trained in an offline manner with trajectories sampled from a
distribution different from the one represented by the GFlowNet and (2) they match the re-
ward function in probability rather than try to find a configuration which maximizes rewards
or returns. The latter property is particularly interesting in the context of exploration, to
ensure the configurations sampled from the generative policy are both interesting and di-
1. In machine learning, a free energy is the logarithm of an unnormalized marginal probability, a generally
intractable sum of exponentiated negative energies.
3
Bengio, Lahlou, Deleu, Hu, Tiwari, Bengio
s0 s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
s6
s7
s8
s9
s10
F(s0 →
s2)
sf
sf sf
sf
sf
sf
s0 s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
s6
s7
s8
s9
s10
sf
sf sf
sf
sf
sf
R(s9)
R(s4)
T erminatingstate
s ∈ S f
Initial state
T erminal
state
Figure 2: Illustration of the structure of a Generative Flow Network (GFlowNet), as a
pointed DAG over statess, with particles flowing along edges to represent the flow function.
Any object sampled by the GFlowNet policy can be obtained by starting from initial state
s0 and then at each step choosing a child with probability proportional to the GFlowNet
policy’s transition probability. This process stops when a terminating action is chosen
from a terminating states(yielding a terminal states f), at which point a rewardR(s) is
obtained. The figure shows a tiny GFlowNet and the possible trajectories froms 0 to any
of the terminal states. It illustrates that in general a state can be reached through several
trajectories. GFlowNet algorithms learn a policy such that the probability of sampling
terminating statesis proportional toR(s). It tries to learn a flow functionF(s) and
F(s→s ′) over all states (including intermediate states)sand transitionss→s ′ with
F(s) =R(s) at terminal states andF(s 0) being the sum of rewards over all terminal states.
A sufficient property to achieve this is that at each state the sum of incoming flows equals
the sum of outgoing flows.
verse. It is also interesting to transform GFlowNets into amortized probabilistic inference
machines: if we choose the reward function to be a prior (over some random variable) times
a likelihood (how well some data is fit given that choice of random variable value), then the
GFlowNet policy learns to sample from the corresponding Bayesian posterior (which is pro-
portional to prior times likelihood). The ability of GFlowNets to generate a diverse set of
samples then corresponds to the ability to sample from the modes of the target distribution.
An important source of inspiration for GFlowNets is the way information propagates
in temporal-difference RL methods (Sutton and Barto, 2018). Both rely on a principle of
coherence for credit assignment which may only be achieved asymptotically when training
converges. While exact gradient calculation may be intractable, because the number of
paths in state space to consider is exponentially large, both methods rely on local coherence
between different components and a training objective that states that if all the learned
components are coherent with each other locally, then we obtain a system that estimates
the quantities of interest globally. Examples include estimation of expected discounted
returns in temporal-difference methods and probability measures with GFlowNets.
This paper extends the theory of the original GFlowNet construction (Bengio et al.,
2021) in several directions, including a new local training objective called detailed balance
(for the analogy with the detailed balance condition of Monte-Carlo Markov chains) which
avoids forming explicit sums required by the previously proposed flow matching loss, as well
as formulations enabling the calculation of marginal probabilities (or free energies) for sub-
4
GFlowNet Foundations
sets of variables, more generally for subsets of larger sets, or subgraphs, their application to
estimating entropy and mutual information, and the introduction of an unsupervised form
of GFlowNets (the reward function is not needed while training, only observations of out-
comes) enabling sampling from a Pareto frontier, for example. Although basic GFlowNets
are more similar to bandits (in that a reward is only provided at the end of a sequence of
actions), they can be extended to take into account intermediate rewards and thus