Abstract
Humans practice slow thinking before performing actual actions when handling
complex tasks in the physical world. This thinking paradigm, recently, has achieved
remarkable advancement in boosting Large Language Models (LLMs) to solve
complex tasks in digital domains. However, the potential of slow thinking remains
largely unexplored for robotic foundation models interacting with the physical
world. In this work, we propose Hume: a dual-system Vision-Language-Action
(VLA) model with value-guided System-2 thinking and cascaded action denoising,
exploring human-like thinking capabilities of Vision-Language-Action models for
dexterous robot control. System 2 of Hume implements value-guided thinking by
extending a Vision-Language-Action Model backbone with a novel value-query
head to estimate the state-action value of predicted actions. The value-guided
thinking is conducted by repeat sampling multiple action candidates and selecting
one according to state-action value. System 1 of Hume is a lightweight reactive
visuomotor policy that takes System 2 selected action and performs cascaded action
∗Authors contributed equally: haomingsong@sjtu.edu.cn
†Corresponding author: dongwang.dw93@gmail.com
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2505.21432v4  [cs.RO]  8 Jul 2025
denoising for dexterous robot control. At deployment time, System 2 performs
value-guided thinking at a low frequency while System 1 asynchronously receives
the System 2 selected action candidate and predicts fluid actions in real time. We
show that Hume outperforms the existing state-of-the-art Vision-Language-Action
models across multiple simulation benchmark and real-robot deployments.
1 Introduction A wise man proportions his belief to the evidence.
David Hume,
An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
Creating generalist robots to perform various tasks like humans in the physical world has been
a long-standing goal [ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Cognitive psychologists have revealed
that humans conduct a deep, deliberate form of thinking when tackling complex problems, such as
mathematical proofs or dinner making. This slow and reflective thought process is known as System-2
thinking, while the fast thinking process that relies on intuition is called System-1 thinking [ 13].
Inspired by the dual process theory of human cognition, thinking and reasoning steps have been
introduced to enhance LLMs’ capability to solve complex problems in digital domains and achieved
significant results. Intuitively, generalist robots in the physical world also require similar System-2
slow thinking capabilities to perform dynamic, dexterous, and complex tasks [14, 15, 16, 17], while
intuition-based fast System-1 thinking is not capable of tackling delicate, tenuous, and fallible robot
action prediction [18, 19, 20, 21]. Therefore, a crucial question for generalist robot policies designed
to solve complex robotic tasks in diverse scenarios is: how to enable effective System-2 slow
thinking in generalist robot policy for accurate action prediction?
However, equipping a generalist robot policy with System-2 thinking capabilities poses two primary
challenges. First, thinking and reasoning techniques have mainly been demonstrated in text modality,
while the delicate, tenuous robot actions lack of clear and consistent semantics, making it difficult to
semantic Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [22] thinking as in LLMs. Second, the generalist robot policy needs
to perform dexterous, complex tasks in real time. How to effectively balance the "slowness" of System-
2 thinking against the "fastness" demanded by robot control is essential. Recently, embodied chain-
of-thought reasoning (ECoT) [23] enable a VLA model to predict helpful intermediate reasoning
text before choosing robot actions, improving the generalization and performance of VLA models.
However, performing intermediate reasoning steps significantly slow down policy inference speed.
Moreover, dual-system architectures have been incorporated into Vision-Language-Action models in
several works [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29]. Typical work Helix [30] adopts a pretrained VLM backbone as
System 2, while employing a smaller network as System 1 to outputs high-frequency actions for real
time control. These approaches use either latent vectors or detailed language instructions as bridges
to communicate between the two systems. Despite their faster inference speed, these models’ System
2 does not conduct effective thinking and reasoning to guide the System-1 action prediction.
In this work, we introduce a dual-system Vision-Language-Action model Hume, which powers the
VLA model with System-2 thinking capabilities through value-guided repeat sampling and cascaded
action denoising. The System 2 of Hume is built on top of a pre-trained vision-language model (VLM)
and attach it with two specialized heads: a flow matching [31, 32] denoising head to predict robot
actions, and a value-query head to estimate the state-action value of predicted actions. It processes
the robot’s observation and language instruction to predict long-horizon action chunk through action
denoising head. Subsequently, the corresponding state-action value are estimated conditioning on
predicted action chunk. The value-guided thinking is conducted by repeat sampling multiple action
chunks and selecting one with the highest value. For System 1 of Hume, it takes one short segment
from the selected long-horizon action chunks from System 2, current visual observation, and robot
states, then conducts cascaded action denoising to generate final fluid robot actions via a separate
lightweight diffusion policy. At deployment time, System 2 performs value-guided thinking at a low
frequency (4 Hz) while System 1 asynchronously receives the System 2 selected action chunk and
predicts fluid actions in real time (90 Hz). Equipped with the proposed value-guided thinking and
cascaded action denoising, Hume explores powerful System 2 slow thinking paradigm to enhance the
VLA models. We extensively evaluate and ablate Hume on both standard simulation benchmarks
and real-robot platforms, including 21 real-world robot settings and 3 simulation environments. To
validate Hume’s capability to solve complex robot control tasks with the assistance of System-2
Thinking, the test scenarios include variations in viewpoint, texture, lighting, layout, unseen objects,
2
unseen environments, as well as the most challenging humanoid robot control tasks. In summary, the
main contributions of this work are three-folds:
• We propose Hume, a dual-system generalist robot policy that explores System-2 slow thinking
paradigm for Vision-Language-Action models.
• We introduce novel value-guided thinking and cascaded action denoising to seamlessly combine
low frequency System 2 and high frequency System 1, resulting in effective thinking and reasoning
in various robot deployments.
• Hume achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks and real-robot tests, achieving
+4.4% increase in success rate over π0 on the LIBERO [ 33] benchmark, +25.9% in Simpler
benchmark [34], and +12.9% improvement in real-world deployments.
2 Related Work
Dual-System Vision-Language-Action Models. Recently, several studies [1, 2, 4, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39,
40, 41, 6, 26, 30, 24] have extended VLMs for robot control. RT-2 [2] fine-tunes PaLI-X [42] with
discretized action tokens, while OpenVLA [4] adapts Prismatic VLM [43] on the OXE dataset [44].
π0 [12] integrates PaliGemma with flow-matching for continuous actions. To address efficiency
and integration challenges, dual-system architectures have emerged. HiRT [ 25] runs VLMs at
low frequencies while maintaining high-frequency vision-based control for real-time interaction.
DexVLA [27] uses diffusion action experts with embodiment curriculum learning across multiple
robot types. GR00T N1 [28] features an end-to-end trained dual-system specifically for humanoid
robots. Gemini Robotics [11] builds on Gemini 2.0 with specialized models for control and reasoning.
HiRobot [29] enables processing of complex instructions with situated feedback. These approaches
improve efficiency, success rates, and adaptability compared to monolithic architectures.
System 2 and System-2 Thinking. Numerous studies [ 22, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52] have
explored System 2 reasoning approaches to enhance LLMs’ problem-solving capabilities. Chain-
of-Thought [22, 53] introduces intermediate reasoning steps before producing answers, while Tree-
of-Thoughts [52] explores multiple solution paths with self-verification. Reflexion [ 45] enables
verbal reflection on previous attempts. System-2 Thinking frameworks explicitly model human-
like deliberative processes. SETS [ 54] combines self-critique with multiple reasoning paths and
majority voting. SC-MCTS [ 55] combines multiple reward models for more robust tree search.
Addressing efficiency concerns, O1-Pruner [ 56] introduces length-penalty loss to create concise
reasoning processes. While these approaches have improved reasoning in language tasks, their
application to visual-language-action models remains largely unexplored.
Cascaded Denoising. Cascaded Denoising [ 57] was first proposed as a diffusion model [ 58]
that generates higher-resolution images through a cascading approach. Starting with a diffusion
model at low resolution, it continuously upsamples the generated images to obtain high-resolution
results. f-DM [ 59] applies inter-stage transformations for progressive signal restoration through
function learning. Cas-DM [60] cascades noise-prediction and image-prediction modules to integrate
perceptual losses in diffusion models. SCDM [61] cascades generation across spectral dimensions,
reconstructing hyperspectral bands progressively. HiFI [62] cascades consistent-resolution patches
for memory-efficient high-resolution frame interpolation. CDM-VTON [ 63] employs two-stage
cascading for virtual try-on applications. While these approaches have advanced capabilities in image
domains, the application of cascaded denoising to integrate System 1 and System 2 remains largely
unexplored.
3 Methodology
In this section, we describe Hume model architecture and its training and deployment strategy in
detail. The process of Value-Guided System-2 Thinking with the help of state-action value estimator
was described in detail in Sec. 3.1. Next, we detail how the System 1 module and System 2 module
cooperate asynchronously through the proposed cascaded action denoising in Sec. 3.2. Finally, the
multi-stage training and deployment strategy of the model is explained in Sec. 3.3.
3
FlowMatchingProgress
FlowMatching Head
S2PaligemmawithExpert4B
Value Query Head
V L
“Get me some snacks.”
imageobservation
robotstates
instruction
 S1VisuoExpert80MS
Sampling N
VVV
Value-Guided ActionSearching
VL
S
headJointEffectorwaist
VVV
noiseactionQQQquery token
temperature
System2SV
FlowMatching Head
System1
BoN Actionaaa
WholeUpper Body Control
Best Execution
L=0L=1L=2L=4aaa
stateactionvalueaction candidates BestofNProbability Path
Figure 2: Overview of Hume. Hume contains two systems working asynchronously. Given the
observation, System 2 of Hume first generates N candidate action chunks with different noise level,
and the best-of-N candidate with the highest Q value will be selected as the optimal candidate Aτ ∗
t ,
which is segmented and conveyed to System 1 for continuous action denoising.
3.1 Value-Guided System-2 Thinking
As shown in Fig. 2, the System 2 module is instantiated as a vision-language-action model (VLA) built
upon a pretrained Vision-Language Model. Formally, the inputs of System 2 module consists of RGB
images it = [I1
t , ..., In
t ] at time step t, natural language instructions ℓt, and robot state information
st. Similar as VLA models, we first augment the VLM backbone with an action denoising head to
learn a mapping function F(·) to generate candidate robot actions At from the observation ot, i.e.,
At = F(ot). Moreover, to empower Hume with System-2 Thinking ability, we attach the VLM
backbone another value-query head, which is designed to estimate the state-action value Qθ(qt, At)
of the candidate robot action At.
Candidate Actions Generation The candidate robot actions are generated by a action denoising
head that aims to model the data distribution p(At|ot), where ot consists of images it, language
instructions ℓt, and robot state informationst. It is implemented as a transformer-based flow matching
denoising process that predicts the remaining action noise vθ(Aτ
t , ot) in the “noisy action” Aτ
t ,
where τ ∈ [0, 1] is the flow matching time step that represents the noise level of the action. Starting
from a random noise A0
t ∼ N (0, I), the denoising head generates actions by gradually removing
the noise from A0
t to A1
t step by step using the forward Euler method: Aτ+δ
t = Aτ
t + δvθ (Aτ
t , ot),
where δ is the size of the denoising step. In practice, we use 10 denoising steps, corresponding to
δ = 0.1. During training, for the ground truth action At sampled from the dataset, the denoising
head is optimized by minimizing the loss between the actual remaining noise ϵ − At and the network
output vθ(Aτ
t , ot) given the observation ot and the noisy action Aτ
t = τ At + (1 − τ)ϵ as input.
After training, conditioned on the same observation ot at timestep t, the action denoising head
generates N candidate robot action chunks Aτn
t ∈ { Aτ1
t , Aτ2
t , . . . , AτN
t } with different noise
levels by integrating the learned vector field vθ (Aτ
t , ot) from τ = 0 to τ = 1 − (n − 1)ξ separately:
Aτn
t =
Z 1−(n−1)ξ
0
vθ (Aτ
t , ot) dτ + A0
t , (1)
where ξ is used to control the noise gap between adjacent candidates, and A0
t is the initial action
sampled from the normal distribution A0
t ∼ N (0, I). Note that n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N}, which leading to
most of generated candidate actions Aτn
t is not fully denoised.
State-Action Value Estimation The state-action values are estimated with the proposed value-query
head built on the same VLM backbone via learning a latent conditioned Q function. The value-query
head is composed of two critic networks estimating state-action values and one actor network for
assisting the training of critic networks. Specifically, a special query token qt is introduced and
attached at the end of the VLM input sequence, which is a learnable token with the same embedding
dimension as the language tokens. Then, for one action chunk At (either ground-truth action AGT
t or
candidate actions Aτn
t ), it is combined with this special query token qt to feed into the value-query
head. Due to its last position of the input sequence, the query token qt attends to all previous tokens
4
Value Map of Candidate Actions
Step = 0 Step = 1 Step = 50 Step = 100
PCA1
PCA2
PCA1
PCA2
PCA1
PCA2
PCA1
PCA2
state -action values
Figure 3: Value Map of Candidate Actions. The candidate actions Aτn
t sampled from System 2
and ground-truth actions AGT
t are projected into the same two-dimensional space through Principal
Component Analysis (PCA). The intensity of colors indicates the magnitude of state-action values
Q(qt, Aτn
t ) of candidate actions.
and aggregates necessary information from the VLM inputs,i.e., current RGB images it = [I1
t , ..., In
t ]
at time step t, natural language instructions ℓt. In this way, the value-query head estimate the state-
action value Qθ(qt, Aτn
t ) of the action chunk Aτn
t conditioned on the input query token qt. This
value-query head is trained on pre-collected robot demonstration dataset with ground-truth action At
via offline RL [64]. We construct the training dataset D using the reward function following [65],
where the rewards of last 3 transitions in one robot episode is defined as +1, and the rest is 0. During
training, we use the calibrated Q-learning algorithm [66] to optimize the value-query head.
To verify our training pipeline can effectively optimize the value-query head, we project ground-
truth actions AGT
t and candidate actions Aτn
t along with their corresponding state-action values
Q(qt, Aτn
t ) into the same space, generating the value map in Fig. 3. The value map consists of
regions representing different magnitudes of state-action values, and the ground-truth actions are
all located in the high-value region, which proves the value-query head can estimate reasonable
state-action value. The detailed analysis can be found in Appendix. A.2
Value-Guided Thinking The System-2 value-guided thinking is implemented with Best-of-N selec-
tion strategy and the selected action chunk is conveyed to System 1 for cascaded action denoising.
Specifically, conditioned on the same observation, the action denoising head generatesN candidate
action chunks {Aτ1
t , Aτ2
t , . . . , AτN
t } with different noise levels. Then, these candidates are passed
to the value-query head to estimate their state-action values. Guided by the estimated state-action
values, we select the action with the highest value as the optimal candidateAτ ∗
t transferred to System
1, depicted as Aτ ∗
t = arg maxAτn
t
Q(qt, Aτn
t ), where n = 1 . . . N. In Appendix. A.1, we further
visualize this process in the simulated Push-T task.
3.2 Cascaded Dual-system Action Denoising
In order to achieve rapid, reactive robot control, System 1 module needs to be lightweight and fast
in inference. In detail, System 1 consists of a DINOv2-small visual encoder and a lightweight
transformer for cascaded action denoising. Given the selected candidate action chunk Aτ ∗
t from
System 2, the System 1 module takes the observation˜ot+kh (including current image it = {I1
t , .., In
t },
robot state st), and sub-action chunks ˜At segmented from the selected candidate Aτ ∗
t as input, and
produces refined robot actions by continuously denoising on sub-action chunks ˜At.
Specifically, at timestep t, the selected action chunk from System 2 is Aτ ∗
t = [at, at+1, ..., at+H−1],
then Aτ ∗
t is segmented into K := H/h sub-action chunks { ˜At, ˜At+h, . . . , ˜At+(K−1)h} with a
horizon of h. The System 1 sequentially performs cascaded denoising on these sub-action chunks
with observation ˜ot+kh. Note that System 1 is much faster than System 2, so that System 1 could
finish cascaded denoising on all sub-action chunks before next action chunk Aτ ∗
t arriving. System 1
5
module is trained with the same flow matching loss using the action denoising head of System 2:
Lω(θ) = Ep( ˜At+kh|˜ot+kh),q( ˜Aω
t+kh| ˜At+kh)||vθ( ˜Aω
t+kh, ˜ot+kh) − u( ˜Aω
t+kh| ˜At+kh)||2, (2)
while the superscript ω represents the flow matching timestep in System 1.
Note that, the generated candidate action chunks from System 2 are not fully denoised, i.e., ˜Aτ ∗
t+kh ̸=
˜A1
t+kh, requiring the continuous denoising for accurate action prediction. Following the continuous
denoising [57] from image generation, System 1 refine the action by intergrating the learned vector
field from ω = 0 to ω = 1. Instead of starting with random noise, the integration process of System 1
starting with the sub-action chunk ˜Aτ ∗
t+kh:
˜Aω
t+kh =
Z ω
0
vθ

˜Aω
t+kh, ˜ot+kh

dω + ˜Aτ ∗
t+kh, (3)
where vθ

˜Aω
t+kh, ot+kh

is the vector field learned by System 1. Using the forward Euler method
˜Aω+σ
t+kh = ˜Aω
t+kh + δvθ

˜Aω
t+kh, ˜ot+kh

, System 1 produces the final denoised action ˜A1
t+kh with
10 denoise steps (corresponding to δ = 0.1). After all K sub-action chunks have been processed by
System 1, System 2 will generate a new selected action chunk Aτ ∗
t+H, and System 1 will continue to
refine segments from the new selected action chunk.
3.3 Training and Deployment Strategy
The training process of Hume contains two stages. In the first stage, the VLM backbone and the
action denoising head of System 2 are trained first using the flow matching loss similar to eq. (2) to
ensure System 2 can predict reliable actions. In the second stage of training, the VLM backbone and
the action denoising head of System 2 are frozen, while System 1 and value-query head of System 2
are trained from scratch. The training objective of the Value-Query Head is to minimize the Bellman
error with a regularization term, which is defined as:
min
θ
αR(θ) + 1
2 Eqt,At,q′
t∼D
h 
Qθ(qt, At) − Bπ ¯Q(qt, At)
2i
, (4)
where R(θ) is a calibrated conservative regularizer that aims to prevent overestimation in the Q-values,
R(θ) := Eqt∼D,a∼π [max (Qθ(qt, At), Qµ(qt, At))] − Eqt,At∼D [Qθ(qt, At)], and Bπ ¯Q(qt, At)
is the backup operator applied to the delayed target Q-network Q¯θ.
During the inference phase, the System 2 and System 1 modules are cooperating at asynchronous
mechanism to boost up the overall control frequency. Specifically, at the initial timestep t, the action
denoising head of System 2 generatesN = 5 multiple action chunks Aτn
t ∈ { Aτ1
t , Aτ2
t , . . . , AτN
t }
with horizon of H = 30 as candidates at 4 Hz. Then the selected optimal action candidate Aτ ∗
t
is stored in a shared queue. Then ˜Aτ ∗
t , a sub-action chunk with horizon h = 15 , is segmented
from the first h steps of Aτ ∗
t and passed into System 1. System 1 removes the remaining noise
from ˜Aτ ∗
t , and produces the fully denoised action ˜At at 6 Hz and execute all h = 15 actions on
real robot immediately, resulting in a overall 90 Hz robot action control frequency. After the robot
executes all K = H/h = 2 sub-action chunks in ˜At, System 1 repeatly get the newest selected
action chunks from the shared queue for subsequent action denoising. Due the different working
frequencies of System 2 and System 1, they asynchronously cooperate to achieve a balance between
slow, human-like thinking and fast, reactive real robot control.
4 Experiment
Our experiments aim to evaluate whether Hume, as a dual-system Vision Language Action Model, can
effectively utilize System-2 Thinking to solve complex robot control tasks. Our extensive experiments
include evaluating the model’s ability to perform complex manipulation tasks on various robotic
platforms in both simulated and real-world environments, including humanoid robots. Hume is
compared with previous state-of-the-art generalist policies and alternative designs of various model
components. Specifically, our experiments aim to answer the following research questions:
6
3rd personcamera
WidowX 250Robot Arm
Gripper
AgiBot G-1 Humanoid Robot
Headcamera
Left handcamera
right handcamera
effector
Franka PandaEmika Robot Arm
3rd personcamera
Effector
6-DOF Servo RobotControl10 Tasks with 15 objectsWhole Upper Body Control4 Robot LearningScenarios 7-DOF Collaborative Arm Control4 Robot Learning Scenarios
SimplerEnv Evaluation of Google Robot and WidowXLIBEROSpatial/Object/Goal/LongEvaluationon Franka
SimplerEnvBenchmarkLiberoBenchmark
Figure 4: Experiments setup on WidowX, AgiBot G-1 and Franka Robot. We evaluate Hume
across 3 simulation environments and 3 different real-world robotic platforms, covering 15 robot
learning scenarios and 21 real-world manipulation tasks.
1. How is Hume’s capability to learn multiple tasks on standard simulation benchmarks?