Abstract
In recent years, machine learning models have made strides t owards human-like
reasoning capabilities from several directions. In this wo rk, we review the current
state of the literature and describe the remaining steps to a chieve a neural model
which can perform System 2 reasoning analogous to a human. We argue that
if current models are insufﬁcient to be classed as performin g reasoning, there
remains very little additional progress needed to attain th at goal.
1 Introduction
The dual process theory of thought processes is long standin g within psychology ( Wason & Evans,
1974; Evans, 2008; Stanovich & West, 2000) and was popularized more broadly by Kahneman
(2012). In this framework, human thinking capabilities are conce ptualized as two distinct modes
of thought. System 1 is fast, automatic, instinctive, and mo re emotional; System 2 is slower, ef-
fortful, deliberate, and more logical. System 1 is, in essen ce, unconscious thought, and System 2
is conscious thought; though there is not yet consensus on wh ether “ah-ha” moments which come
following an incubation period are triggered by unconsciou s work of System 1 or 2 ( Christensen,
2005; Gilhooly, 2016). Additionally, due to its instinctive and reactive nature , System 1 is more
prone to bias than System 2, though System 2 is not without bia s (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974).
In comparison to these two cognitive systems of thought, fee d-forward neural networks are some-
times described as being analogous to System 1. Their output s are immediate and automatic, yielded
immediately without what might call “deliberation”. Like w ith System 1, the computational system
producing the output does not and can not provide an explicit explanation for why it produced a cer-
tain response, making interpretability challenging, even when attempting to induce it to provide an
a posteriori justiﬁcation for its response ( Jung et al., 2022). Such systems are effectively performing
pattern matching for their current stimulus against the bod y of data imbibed during training.
In comparison, symbolic rule-based algorithms (classical “artiﬁcial intelligence”), whether they are
manually or programatically created, can provide an explan ation for their reasoning. However their
performance is limited because the space of the real-world i s too large to be handled with a narrow
set of rules that are coded in the stimulus domain ( Yihe et al., 2019).
In this work, we review the existing literature in the space o f reasoning from the perspective of
cognitive psychology and machine learning, and we speculat e on what form a neural network would
need to take for it to be able to perform reasoning in the style of System 2. We argue the majority
of hurdles needed to achieve this task have already been clea red, and there are a small number of
pieces of the puzzle remaining. Thus complex agents, traine d through deep learning, that can reason
logically about the real-world will be available in the near -term, if they are not here already.
The First Workshop on System-2 Reasoning at Scale, NeurIPS 2 024.
2 Background
2.1 Modalities of human thought
Historic texts indicate that ancient philosophers such as P lato believed that thinking was synony-
mous with an inner monologue (
Wiley, 2006). However, whilst an internal monologue (inner
speech) is common, it is not ubiquitous and most people overe stimate how often their thoughts
are expressed verbally ( Hurlburt et al., 2013). There is a wide variety of inner experiences across
humans (Hurlburt & Heavy, 2006), and most people are surprised when they ﬁrst discover that other
people’s internal experiences differ greatly from their ow n.
The modalities of human inner thought are ( Hurlburt & Schwitzgebel, 2011; Hurlburt et al., 2013):
• Inner speaking/inner monologue — thoughts expressed verb ally, e.g. talking to yourself,
hearing your/a voice while recalling.
• Inner seeing/visual imagery — thoughts expressed visuall y, e.g. picturing a memory or
imagining a hypothetical scene.
• Feelings — a conscious experience of emotional processes, e.g. sadness when grieving.
• Unsymbolized thinking — thoughts expressed without words or images, e.g. drinking a
glass of water, without internal discussion or commentary.
• Sensory awareness — attending to a sensory aspect of the env ironment for an unimportant
reason, e.g. hearing someone talk but seeing the light reﬂec ting off their glasses.
Most people experience inner speech and inner imagery some o f the time but not all of the time,
with the majority of their thought processes unsymbolized ( Hurlburt et al., 2013). However there
are outliers in each direction, with some people having no in ner speech (anauralia), constant inner
speech, no mind’s eye (aphantasia), or extremely vivid ment al imagery as detailed as sensory stim-
uli (hyperphantasia). Day-to-day observations of people a cross society demonstrate, and academic
studies conﬁrm, that people are able to complete tasks irres pective of whether their internal thoughts
are represented through speech, imagery, or neither ( Keogh et al., 2021; Hinwar & Lambert, 2021);
though the lack of inner sight does impair the ability to reca ll visual characteristics ( Monzel et al. ,
2022; Bainbridge et al., 2021). Additionally, note that those possessing an inner monolo gue who
speak multiple languages can have their inner monologue ﬂip between languages depending on re-
cent context. These observations lead us to hypothesize tha t conscious thoughts (i.e. System 2
thinking) are fundamentally abstract in nature , but can be projected to language and visual
modalities internally.
2.2 What is System 2 reasoning?
As a thought exercise, consider the task of solving this illu strative example from the Cognitive
Reﬂection Test (Frederick, 2005):
A bat and a ball together cost $1.10. The bat costs $1 more than the ball. How much does
the ball cost?
F or illustrative purposes, please brieﬂy solve the problem yourself before reading ahead. System 1
is responsible for the automatic response which immediatel y comes to mind on reading the problem:
ten cents. This answer is yielded in an involuntary manner, s eemingly to all who hear the question
for the ﬁrst time. However, by engaging System 2 we can verify whether the intuitive solution is
correct, and reason about it. By reﬂecting on the intuitive a nswer, one can observe that if this were
the price of the ball, the total would be $1.20, hence the answ er is incorrect. Since as the total price
is the difference in price between the two objects ($1) plus twice the price of the ball, the answer is
in fact 5 cents.
If we analyze it, it appears that the instinctive response st ems from pattern matching—the problem
looks at ﬁrst glance like other problems comparing the quant ity of two items, which we have solved
in the past using the “subtraction” method, hence we instinc tively try to apply it here. Analogous
mistakes can be seen in large language model (LLM) outputs, w here they respond to a fake logic
puzzle as if it were real (
Richardson, 2024).
2
One way to conceptualize such reasoning is as a series of hypo thesis generation and veriﬁcation
steps. If the initial hypothesis fails the veriﬁcation, we t hen come up with a new hypothesis condi-
tioned on the new information generated during the veriﬁcat ion process. This process is repeated
until a revised hypothesis satisﬁes the veriﬁcation step. S uch a framework is similar to the Actor-
Critic reinforcement learning algorithm ( Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999), with the actor analogous to the
hypothesis generator and the critic as the veriﬁer. This cou ld be interpreted as alternating steps of
System 1 (for hypothesis generation) and 2 (critique), howe ver such a construction is contrary to
prevalent psychological models of cognitive processes suc h as the dual process theory.
Alternatively, human reasoning can be conceptualized as a t rain of thought in a continuous stream
of consciousness ( Potter et al., 2014; James, 2012). This framework is comparable to the chain-of-
thought LLM prompting technique ( Wei et al., 2022), in which a model reaches its ﬁnal output by
focusing on a series of steps.
2.3 Existing neural reasoning agents
Previous work has found that by prompting LLMs with an in-con text example of chain-of-thought
reasoning, and asking it to think step-by-step for its own an swer, models can be coerced into “think-
ing” step-by-step (
Wei et al., 2022). Providing such a prompt changes the distribution of most l ikely
initial next tokens to be steps towards the solution instead of an immediate answer. By having
the model attend to its own outputs as it progresses, it can bu ild on its previous steps, eventually
producing a ﬁnal result that is more likely to be accurate ( Wei et al., 2022; Li et al. , 2024). How-
ever, recent work has demonstrated the majority of the gains seen when using chain-of-thought
prompting can be matched by prompting with a long series of ta sk-independent ﬁller tokens instead,
suggesting the length of the sequence and the size of the comp ute graph is more important than
the textual output ( Pfau et al., 2024). This implies the transformer can process data through uns een
computations within the hidden layers of the network, unwit nessed in the chain-of-thought tokens
that it outputs. Such ﬁndings may be analogous to System 2 rea soning in humans, which we noted
in Section 2.1 are primarily non-symbolic but can be projected to consciou sly observed language
streams ( Hurlburt et al., 2013), though such a hypothesis is challenging to investigate du e to the
difﬁculties of interpreting deep transformer representat ions (Rai et al., 2024).
In the domain of closed-world games, tremendous gains were s een by applying deep reinforcement
learning models that learn through self-play to optimize a v alue function ( Silver et al., 2016, 2017,
2018). In this case, the value network can be ﬁt to predict the like lihood of each player winning the
game from a given position. The result of the game can be objec tively determined by continuing to
play the match and seeing who wins, providing a strong traini ng signal to the value network. And
since the value network is able to ﬁt this task, it is able to st eer the actor model effectively. Results
are further improved by performing a Monte Carlo Markov chai n tree search at inference time,
guided by the model’s predictions to prune the tree to a narro w range of feasible moves, to evaluate
future game states and choose an optimal move. Such searches are similar to the Tree-of-thoughts
approach to improve chain-of-thoughts reasoning ( Long, 2023; Y ao et al., 2023).
Similarly, when deploying LLMs on mathematics problems, st ep-level veriﬁcation of chain-of-
thought has been shown to be effective training technique ( Cobbe et al. , 2021; Uesato et al. , 2022;
Lightman et al., 2024).
3 Future steps and potential pitfalls
3.1 Learning to reason
Given the existing neural reasoning techniques, and their analogous relationship to human reasoning
processes, we posit that networks already can learn to reaso n.
Multiple works have shown training LLMs to reason step-by-s tep is best achieved by step-level
feedback (
Zelikman et al., 2022; Pfau et al., 2024; Lightman et al., 2024). One issue for training a
reasoning model at scale is thus that there is a lack of large- scale reasoning datasets to train on in
which humans have written out their train of thoughts explic itly. However, such data can be ac-
quired at modest scale (e.g. Y ang et al., 2018), and, by explicitly labelling which steps are valid and
which are not, such data can be used to train a veriﬁer that pre dicts whether individual logical rea-
soning steps are sound. This veriﬁer, similar to the rationa lization evaluator used by Zelikman et al.
3
(2022), can then serve a similar role to the step-wise maths proble m solver of Lightman et al. (2024).
Using this, we can bootstrap more chain-of-thou