ABSTRACT
Training energy-based models (EBMs) on high-dimensional data can be both chal-
lenging and time-consuming, and there exists a noticeable gap in sample quality
between EBMs and other generative frameworks like GANs and diffusion models.
To close this gap, inspired by the recent efforts of learning EBMs by maximizing
diffusion recovery likelihood (DRL), we propose cooperative diffusion recovery
likelihood (CDRL), an effective approach to tractably learn and sample from a
series of EBMs defined on increasingly noisy versions of a dataset, paired with an
initializer model for each EBM. At each noise level, the two models are jointly es-
timated within a cooperative training framework: samples from the initializer serve
as starting points that are refined by a few MCMC sampling steps from the EBM.
The EBM is then optimized by maximizing recovery likelihood, while the initializer
model is optimized by learning from the difference between the refined samples and
the initial samples. In addition, we made several practical designs for EBM training
to further improve the sample quality. Combining these advances, our approach
significantly boost the generation performance compared to existing EBM methods
on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of our
models for several downstream tasks, including classifier-free guided generation,
compositional generation, image inpainting and out-of-distribution detection. Our
code is available at https://github.com/AlvinZhuyx/CDRL.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Energy-based models (EBMs), as a class of probabilistic generative models, have exhibited their
flexibility and practicality in a variety of application scenarios, such as realistic image synthesis (Xie
et al., 2016; 2018a; Nijkamp et al., 2019; Du & Mordatch, 2019; Arbel et al., 2021; Hill et al., 2022;
Xiao et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2023; Grathwohl et al., 2021; Cui & Han, 2023), graph generation (Liu
et al., 2021), compositional generation (Du et al., 2020; 2023), video generation (Xie et al., 2021c),
3D generation (Xie et al., 2021a; 2018b), simulation-based inference (Glaser et al., 2022), stochastic
optimization (Kong et al., 2022), out-of-distribution detection (Grathwohl et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2020), and latent space modeling (Pang et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Yu et al.,
2023). Despite these successes of EBMs, training and sampling from EBMs remains challenging,
mainly due of the intractability of the partition function in the distribution.
Recently, Diffusion Recovery Likelihood (DRL) (Gao et al., 2021) has emerged as a powerful
framework for estimating EBMs. Inspired by diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019), DRL assumes a sequence of EBMs for the marginal distributions
of samples perturbed by a Gaussian diffusion process, where each EBM is trained with recovery
likelihood that maximizes the conditional probability of the data at the current noise level given their
noisy versions at a higher noise level. Compared to the regular likelihood, Maximizing recovery
likelihood is more tractable, as sampling from the conditional distribution is much easier than
sampling from the marginal distribution. DRL achieves exceptional generation performance among
EBM-based generative models. However, a noticeable performance gap still exists between the
sample quality of EBMs and other generative frameworks like GANs or diffusion models. Moreover,
DRL requires around 30 MCMC sampling steps at each noise level to generate valid samples, which
can be time-consuming during both training and sampling processes.
1
arXiv:2309.05153v5  [stat.ML]  10 Nov 2024
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
To further close the performance gap and expedite EBM training and sampling with fewer MCMC
sampling steps, we introduce Cooperative Diffusion Recovery Likelihood (CDRL), that jointly
estimates a sequence of EBMs and MCMC initializers defined on data perturbed by a diffusion
process. At each noise level, the initializer and EBM are updated by a cooperative training scheme
(Xie et al., 2018a): The initializer model proposes initial samples by predicting the samples at the
current noise level given their noisy versions at a higher noise level. The initial samples are then
refined by a few MCMC sampling steps from the conditional distribution defined by the EBM. Given
the refined samples, the EBM is updated by maximizing recovery likelihood, and the initializer is
updated to absorb the difference between the initial samples and the refined samples. The introduced
initializer models learn to accumulate the MCMC transitions of the EBMs, and reproduce them by
direct ancestral sampling. Combining with a new noise schedule and a variance reduction technique,
we achieve significantly better performance than the existing methods of estimating EBMs. We
further incorporate classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2022) to enhance the performance
of conditional generation, and we observe similar trade-offs between sample quality and sample
diversity as CFG for diffusion models when adjusting the guidance strength. In addition, we showcase
that our approach can be applied to perform several useful downstream tasks, including compositional
generation, image inpainting and out-of-distribution detection.
Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We propose cooperative diffusion recovery likelihood
(CDRL) that tractably and efficiently learns and samples from a sequence of EBMs and MCMC
initializers; (2) We make several practical design choices related to noise scheduling, MCMC
sampling, noise variance reduction for EBM training; (3) Empirically we demonstrate that CDRL
achieves significant improvements on sample quality compared to existing EBM approaches, on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet 32 × 32 datasets; (4) We show that CDRL has great potential to enable
more efficient sampling with sampling adjustment techniques; (5) We demonstrate CDRL’s ability in
compositional generation, image inpainting and out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, as well as its
compatibility with classifier-free guidance for conditional generation.
2 P RELIMINARIES ON ENERGY -BASED MODELS
Let x ∼ pdata(x) be a training example from an underlying data distribution. An energy-based model
defines the density of x by
pθ(x) = 1
Zθ
exp(fθ(x)), (1)
where fθ is the unnormalized log density, or negative energy, parametrized by a neural network
with a scalar output. Zθ is the normalizing constant or partition function. The derivative of the
log-likelihood function of an EBM can be approximately written as
L′(θ) = Epdata
 ∂
∂θ fθ(x)

− Epθ
 ∂
∂θ fθ(x)

, (2)
where the second term is analytically intractable and has to be estimated by Monte Carlo samples
from the current model pθ. Therefore, applying gradient-based optimization for an EBM usually
involves an inner loop of MCMC sampling, which can be time-consuming for high-dimensional data.
3 C OOPERATIVE DIFFUSION RECOVERY LIKELIHOOD
3.1 D IFFUSION RECOVERY LIKELIHOOD
Given the difficulty of sampling from the marginal distributionp(x) defined by an EBM, we could
instead estimate a sequence of EBMs defined on increasingly noisy versions of the data and jointly
estimate them by maximizing recovery likelihood. Specifically, assume a sequence of noisy training
examples perturbed by a Gaussian diffusion process: x0, x1, ..., xT such that x0 ∼ pdata; xt+1 =
αt+1xt + σt+1ϵ. Denote yt = αt+1xt for notation simplicity. The marginal distributions of
{yt; t = 1 , ..., T} are modeled by a sequence of EBMs: pθ(yt) = 1
Zθ,t
exp(fθ(yt; t)). Then the
conditional EBM of yt given the sample xt+1 at a higher noise level can be derived as
pθ(yt|xt+1) = 1
˜Zθ,t(xt+1)
exp

fθ(yt; t) − 1
2σ2
t+1
∥yt − xt+1∥2

, (3)
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
where ˜Zθ,t(xt+1) is the partition function of the conditional EBM dependent onxt+1. Compared with
the marginal EBM pθ(yt), when σt+1 is small, the extra quadratic term in pθ(yt|xt+1) constrains
the conditional energy landscape to be localized around xt+1, making the latter less multi-modal and
easier to sample from with MCMC. In the extreme case when σt+1 is infinitesimal, pθ(yt|xt+1) is
approximately a Gaussian distribution that can be tractably sampled from and has a close connection
to diffusion models (Gao et al., 2021). In the other extreme case when σt+1 → ∞, the conditional
distribution falls back to the marginal distribution, and we lose the advantage of being more MCMC
friendly for the conditional distribution. Therefore, we need to maintain a small σt+1 between
adjacent time steps, and to equip the model with the ability of generating new samples from white
noises, we end up with estimating a sequence of EBMs defined on the diffusion process. We use the
variance-preserving noise schedule (Song et al., 2021b), under which case we have xt = ¯αtx0 + ¯σtϵ,
where ¯αt =QT
t=1 αt and ¯σt =
p
1 − ¯α2
t .
We estimate each EBM by maximizing the following recovery log-likelihood function at each noise
level (Bengio et al., 2013):
Jt(θ) = 1
n
nX
i=1
log pθ(yt,i|xt+1,i), (4)
where {yt,i, xt+1,i} are pair of samples at time steps t and t + 1. Sampling from pθ(yt|xt+1) can be
achieved by running K steps of Langevin dynamics from the initialization point ˜y0
t = xt+1,i and
iterating
˜yτ+1
t = ˜yτ
t + s2
t
2

∇yfθ(˜yτ
t ; t) − 1
σ2
t+1
(˜yτ
t − xt+1)

+ stϵτ , (5)
where st is the step size and τ is the index of MCMC sampling step. With the samples, the updating
of EBMs then follows the same learning gradients as MLE (Equation 2), as the extra quadratic term
− 1
2σ2
t+1
∥yt − xt+1∥2 in pθ(yt|xt+1) does not involve learnable parameters. It is worth noting that
maximizing recovery likelihood still guarantees an unbiased estimator of the true parameters of the
marginal distribution of the data.
3.2 A MORTIZING MCMC SAMPLING WITH INITIALIZER MODELS
Although pθ(yt|xt+1) is easier to sample from than pθ(yt), when σt+1 is not infinitesimal, the ini-
tialization of MCMC sampling, xt+1, may still be far from the data manifold of yt. This necessitates
a certain amount of MCMC sampling steps at each noise level (e.g.,30 steps of Langevin dynamics in
Gao et al. (2021)). Naively reducing the number of sampling steps would lead to training divergence
or performance degradation.
To address this issue, we propose to learn an initializer model jointly with the EBM at each noise
level, which maps xt+1 closer to the manifold of yt. Our work is inspired by the CoopNets (Xie
et al., 2018a; 2021b; 2022b), which shows that jointly training a top-down generator via MCMC
teaching will help the training of a single EBM model. We take this idea and generalize it to the
recovery-likelihood model. More discussions are included in Appendix A. Specifically, the initializer
model at noise level t is defined as
qϕ(yt|xt+1) ∼ N (gϕ(xt+1; t), ˜σ2
t I). (6)
It serves as a coarse approximation to pθ(yt|xt+1), as the former is a single-mode Gaussian
distribution while the latter can be multi-modal. A more general formulation would be to in-
volve latent variables zt following a certain simple prior p(zt) into gϕ. Then qϕ(yt, t|xt+1) =
Ep(zt) [qϕ(yt, zt, t|xt+1)] can be non-Gaussian (Xiao et al., 2022). However, we empirically find
that the simple initializer in Equation 6 works well. Compared with the more general formulation,
the simple initializer avoids the inference of zt which may again require MCMC sampling, and leads
to more stable training. Different from Xiao et al. (2022), samples from the initializer just serves as
the starting points and are refined by sampling from the EBM, instead of being treated as the final
samples. We follow (Ho et al., 2020) to set ˜σt =
r
1−¯α2
t
1−¯α2
t+1
σt. If we treat the sequence of initializers
as the reverse process, such choice of ˜σt corresponds to the lower bound of the standard deviation
given by pdata being a delta function (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015).
3
Published 