ABSTRACT
• Hybrid transformer with liquid neural 
networks model for building energy 
forecasting.
• Convolutional neural network encoders 
to understand temporal dynamics in 
energy data through spatial mappings.
• Reservoir processing module imple -
mented with liquid neural networks to 
capture non-linear relations in energy 
data.
• Validation on various building contexts, 
including large apartment buildings and 
small households.
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Residential building
Commercial building
Households
Energy forecasting
Transformer model
Liquid neural network
ABSTRACT
Accurate forecasting of buildings ’ energy demand is essential for building operators to manage loads and re -
sources efficiently, and for grid operators to balance local production with demand. However, nowadays models 
still struggle to capture nonlinear relationships influenced by external factors like weather and consumer 
behavior, assume constant variance in energy data over time, and often fail to model sequential data. To address 
these limitations, we propose a hybrid Transformer-based model with Liquid Neural Networks and learnable 
encodings for building energy forecasting. The model leverages Dense Layers to learn non-linear mappings to 
create embeddings that capture underlying patterns in time series energy data. Additionally, a Convolutional 
Neural Network encoder is integrated to enhance the model ’ s ability to understand temporal dynamics through 
spatial mappings. To address the limitations of classic attention mechanisms, we implement a reservoir pro -
cessing module using Liquid Neural Networks which introduces a controlled non-linearity through dynamic 
reservoir computing, enabling the model to capture complex patterns in the data. For model evaluation, we 
utilized both pilot data and state-of-the-art datasets to determine the model ’ s performance across various 
building contexts, including large apartment and commercial buildings and small households, with and without 
on-site energy production. The proposed transformer model demonstrates good predictive accuracy and training 
time efficiency across various types of buildings and testing configurations. Specifically, SMAPE scores indicate a 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: gabriel.antonesi@cs.utcluj.ro (G. Antonesi), tudor.cioara@cs.utcluj.ro (T. Cioara), ionut.anghel@cs.utcluj.ro (I. Anghel), jpapias@epu.ntua.gr
(I. Papias), vmichalakopoulos@epu.ntua.gr (V. Michalakopoulos), esarmas@epu.ntua.gr (E. Sarmas). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Energy and AI
journal homepag e: www.sci encedirect.co m/journal/ energy-and -ai
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyai.2025.100489
Energy and AI 20 (2025) 100489 
Available online 18 February 2025 
2666-5468/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 
reduction in prediction error, with improvements ranging from 1.5 % to 50 % over basic transformer, LSTM and 
ANN models while the higher R² values further confirm the model’s reliability in capturing energy time series 
variance. The 8 % improvement in training time over the basic transformer model, highlights the hybrid model 
computational efficiency without compromising accuracy.
1. Introduction
The decarbonization of the smart grid requires not only the large- 
scale deployment of renewable energy sources but also better planning 
and demand-side management [ 1 , 2 ]. Therefore, the grid operators have 
put in place demand management programs to encourage consumers to 
reduce or shift energy usage during peak periods. As a significant 
amount of the energy demand is attributed to the buildings, efforts must 
be committed to increase their interoperability with the smart grid and 
transform them into active players participating in demand response 
programs [ 3 , 4 ]. However, to make this vision possible it is important to 
have accurate predictions of the building’s energy demand. They will 
enable the building operators to anticipate the load and efficiently 
allocate resources to achieve cost reductions, and the system operators 
to plan and balance the local production with the demand [ 5 ].
Statistical methods such as Autoregressive Integrated Moving 
Average (ARIMA) and its derivates rely only on the past energy values 
making them relatively easy to interpret and effective in linear contexts 
[ 6–8 ]. However, they have problems in capturing nonlinear relation -
ships in energy consumption patterns, which can be influenced, among 
others, by external factors such as weather variability and consumer 
behavior. Additionally, these models assume that the variance in energy 
data remains constant over time, which may not always be true. 
Therefore, machine learning models have been used for energy pre -
dictions as they excel in capturing complex, nonlinear patterns in data 
and may easily integrate external variables such as weather data [ 9 ]. 
Energy prediction models based on Support Vector Machines (SVMs) 
[ 10 , 11 ] decision trees [ 12 ] and Random Forests [ 13 , 14 ] have been 
successful for short-term load forecasting, offering improved general -
ization compared to autoregression ones. However, these models cannot 
often model sequential energy data as effectively as deep learning 
techniques.
Deep learning models can handle multiple inputs, (i.e. time series 
energy data, weather, consumer behavior), without the need for manual 
feature engineering while addressing the challenge of sequential data 
processing (e.g. Recurrent Neural Networks - RNNs) [ 15 , 16 ]. However, 
RNNs often suffer from the vanishing gradient problem, limiting their 
effectiveness over long energy data sequences [ 17 , 18 ]. Long Short-Term 
Memory (LSTM) models incorporate gating mechanisms to capture 
long-term dependencies in energy data more effectively showing better 
performance in energy demand prediction and capturing temporal dy -
namics like daily and seasonal variations [ 17 ]. Liu et al. [ 19 ] showed 
that LSTM models achieve greater accuracy in electricity load fore -
casting compared to traditional RNNs. Similarly, Bouktif et al. [ 20 ] 
enhance forecasting precision by employing an LSTM model that in -
corporates optimally selected time-lagged features. Sarmas et al. [ 21 ] 
successfully developed and fine-tuned four distinct LSTM models to 
accurately predict the output of three rooftop PV plants in Portugal. 
Additionally, researchers in Michalakopoulos et al. [ 22 ] optimized 
LSTM architectures using the Optuna framework for hyperparameter 
tuning to improve the performance across various PV scenarios.
Recently Transformer models have shown promise in overcoming 
these challenges by using self-attention mechanisms to weigh the 
importance of different parts of the input energy data sequence, allow -
ing them to capture relationships between distant data elements more 
effectively [ 23–25 ]. The multi-head attention mechanism proved to be 
successful in handling complex time-series data scenarios, such as wind 
and solar power forecasting with improved accuracy [ 26 ]. Zhou et al. 
applied this concept in the context of energy forecasting [ 27 ] and their 
Informer model improves the efficiency of Transformers by using 
ProbSparse attention. This enables scalable forecasting for large-scale 
energy datasets without getting an accuracy penalty. Additionally, 
they had introduced positional encoding to make them better suited for 
time series tasks. The multi-head attention mechanism can handle 
long-term dependencies better than traditional RNN-based models like 
LSTM and GRU, obtaining higher accuracy [ 28–30 ]. Also, attention 
mechanisms have been applied to data imputation tasks, being able to 
keep temporal dynamics and improve forecasting accuracy [ 31 ]. 
Furthermore, adaptive models using Principal Component Analysis for 
dimensionality reduction before passing data into the Transformer 
model have been shown to focus only on the most informative features 
[ 32 ]. To enhance the interpretability of the model, the Interformer [ 33 ] 
was proposed for probabilistic short-term forecasting for the residential 
load. By incorporating sparse self-attention, the model reduces the 
computational complexity, while still providing important information 
about the variables that have the highest impact on the predictions. For 
wind energy generation forecasting, Li et al. [ 34 ] have shown that 
integrating the Transformer’s self-attention mechanism with causal 
convolution and empirical mode decomposition improves the fore -
casting accuracy by capturing the local dependencies and the sharp 
variations in wind power data. Similarly, Harrou et al. [ 35 ] integrate a 
Variational Autoencoder with a self-attention mechanism for both the 
encoder and decoder layers. The model enhances the short-term wind 
power prediction accuracy by focusing on the most informative features 
provided in the input and using a nonlinear approximation in modelling 
the energy time series. Yu et al. integrated a dynamic self-attention 
mechanism (i.e., Temporal Fusion Transformer) into a solar power 
forecasting model to improve short-term predictions [ 36 ]. The attention 
mechanism’s dynamic nature enables the model to gradually modify its 
focus on relevant features, hence assisting in the management of the 
various trends monitored in energy generation prediction.
However, the Transformers are more computationally complex than 
traditional neural network models especially as the time series sequence 
length and model size increase. To reduce the computational 
complexity, adaptive mechanisms for encoders, decoders, and attention 
mechanisms have been introduced. Mo et al. [ 37 ] use sparse 
self-attention and temporal pooling to improve computational effi -
ciency, while not compromising the prediction accuracy. They use 
LSTM-based embedding to address the weak temporal prediction capa -
bilities of the transformer model. Adaptive attention mechanisms have 
also been introduced to handle fluctuations in energy data and they 
perform well in terms of medium-term wind power forecasting [ 38 ]. 
Similarly, models that optimize the attention mechanism for 
multi-horizon, multi-source load forecasting in integrated energy sys -
tems, have been shown to improve prediction accuracy [ 39 ]. Wang et al. 
[ 25 ] proposed a cross-entity attention mechanism and shared variable 
selection networks to handle relationships between different entities in a 
smart grid (i.e., buildings, single prosumers, etc.). The mechanism can 
learn relationships among entities to inform the decoder about which 
entity the encoder should focus on. Qu et al. [ 40 ] proposed a transformer 
model with three key features: better long-distance dependence than 
LSTM, a multi-headed attention mechanism, and parallel computation 
for faster training. The model has been successfully applied to forecast 
the power output of multiple wind farms showing better accuracy 
compared to LSTM-based models. Dai et al. [ 41 ] proposed the use of 
self-attention-based neural network to capture the temporal relations in 
power sequences. Such models have shown good adaptation capabilities 
to real-time changes in wind power data being able to handle 
G. Antonesi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Energy and AI 20 (2025) 100489 
2 
ultra-short-term forecasting. Wu et al. [ 42 ], proposed Autoformer which 
adds a decomposition block to describe the trend and seasonal compo -
nents in time-series data, is another significant example. By dividing the 
input data into distinct components, the Autoformer improves fore -
casting accuracy for solar and wind energy.
To further improve the model temporal relationships in sequential 
energy data, generalization capabilities and reduce the computational 
complexity concerning the sequence length, recent studies have 
explored the combination of Transformers with other architectural 
models like CNNs and GRUs. Tian et al. [ 43 ] combine LSTM with 
Informer to improve the representation capabilities in the case of time 
series and a parallel encoder module to improve the robustness. A hybrid 
CNN-GRU-Transformer model has been shown to surpass traditional 
models in terms of accuracy in solar power forecasting [ 44 ]. Also, a 
hybrid CNN-Transformer was proposed using the CNN abilities to 
extract spatial features and combine them with the Transformer ’ s 
attention mechanism [ 45 ]. This hybrid approach shows promising re -
sults in wind power forecasting, improving both accuracy and compu -
tational resource use. Graph-based models have also been employed to 
capture spatial dependencies between different wind farms [ 46 , 47 ]. For 
instance, a Graph-Convolution Network (GCN) combined with 
Multi-Resolution Convolution Networks (MRCN) for short-term wind 
power prediction resulted in higher accuracy, compared to standalone 
CNN or RNN models. The Graph Patch Informer (GPI) extends the 
Transformer model by integrating Graph Attention Networks (GATs) 
that allow for the modeling of spatial dependencies [ 48 ]. Liu and Fu 
applied this hybrid approach to renewable energy forecasting, although 
the model has increased complexity and demands substantial compu -
tational power to train, which limits its scalability for widespread use. 
Additionally, the application of self-supervised techniques can help in 
discovering and learning more features from energy data. Xiang et al. 
proposed a hybrid model combining a Self-Attention Temporal Con -
volutional Network (SATCN) [ 49 ] with an LSTM to predict 
ultra-short-term wind power. This outperforms existing methods like 
LSTM, CNN-LSTM, and TCN-LSTM in terms of root mean square error 
(RMSE) and mean absolute error (MAE). Huang et al. demonstrated that 
this approach, when combined with Transformer models, has the po -
tential to increase the generalization capabilities in multi-step fore -
casting tasks [ 50 ]. For residential buildings, a hybrid model combining 
multivariate variational mode decomposition, and a Temporal Fusion 
Transformer has been developed for short load forecasting and it de -
composes the load series into intrinsic mode functions, which makes the 
model handle variations within the input data better [ 51 ]. This, com -
bined with a whale optimization algorithm, results in higher forecasting 
accuracy. Finally, Pan et al. [ 52 ] introduced a transformer framework 
that uses a local-global scale architecture. The model is highly appli -
cable due to the integration of edge computing and IoT devices that 
enable real-time data collection and processing.
Despite their strengths for natural languages processing, the state-of- 
the-art transformers models have specific drawbacks in time series en -
ergy predictions, regarding computation, temporal dynamics and noise 
handling. The computational cost of these models, especially when 
applied to large energy datasets, remains a major drawback [ 53 , 54 ]. 
Wang et al. [ 55 ] note that the high computational requirements for 
multi-source data fusion models may lead to a decline in performance in 
real-time applications. Furthermore, for specific scenarios, LSTMs or 
linear regression can outperform the Transformer model and in envi -
ronments where data is low-dimensional, the marginal accuracy im -
provements do not always justify the computational costs. To address 
these limitations, we propose a hybrid approach that integrates a 
Transformer-based architecture with Liquid Neural Networks (LNNs) 
and learnable encodings to handle both the complex temporal de -
pendencies and non-linear patterns found in energy consumption data. 
The model leverages Dense Layers to learn non-linear mappings, 
enabling it to create embeddings that capture underlying patterns in 
time series energy data. A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) encoder 
is integrated to enhance the model ’ s ability to understand temporal 
dynamics through spatial mappings. At the same time, an adaptive po -
sitional encoding combines sinusoidal, temporal, and learnable encod -
ings. To address the limitations of classic attention mechanisms, which 
primarily rely on linear transformations and simple dot products and 
may not capture these non-linear relationships effectively, we introduce 
a Reservoir Processing module implemented using LNNs. A controlled 
non-linearity is introduced through dynamic reservoir computing, 
which can model complex patterns in the data that are not immediately 
apparent or are obscured by noise and fluctuations. The proposed 
transformer model shows good prediction accuracy with good training 
time efficiency over various pilot data and state-of-the-art datasets while 
considering different building contexts, such as large buildings of 
apartments or small households with and without on-site energy 
production.
The paper ’ s contributions beyond the state of the art are: 
• A hybrid transformer model for building energy forecasting that 
combines the transformer architecture with LNNs, and learnable 
encodings achieving good prediction accuracy and training effi -
ciency across different building contexts.
• Integration of CNN encoders with adaptive positional encoding to 
capture non-linear mappings and enhance the understanding of 
temporal dynamics in time series energy data.
• A Reservoir Processing module implemented using Liquid Neural 
Networks to capture more effective complex non-linear energy data 
patterns that can be masked by noise and fluctuations.
• Evaluation of predictive performance across different types of 
buildings including apartments building, residential and commercial 
buildings and households prosumers showing good generalization 
features and energy prediction accuracy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the 
architecture of our proposed hybrid transformer model detailing its key 
components; Section 3 details the experimental setup and energy pre -
diction results for various building cases and Section 4 discuss the pre -
diction accuracy and training time results in comparison with basic 
transformer, LTSM and ANN, whilst Section 5 concludes the paper and 
presents potential future directions.