Abstract
We present a generic algorithm for learning
and approximate inference with an intuitive
epistemic interpretation: iteratively focus on
a subset of the model and resolve inconsisten-
cies using the parameters under control. This
framework, which we call Local Inconsistency
Resolution (LIR) is built upon Probabilistic
Dependency Graphs (PDGs), which provide a
flexible representational foundation capable of
capturing inconsistent beliefs. We show how
LIR unifies and generalizes a wide variety of
important algorithms in the literature, includ-
ing the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algo-
rithm, belief propagation, adversarial training,
GANs, and GFlowNets. In the last case, LIR
actually suggests a more natural loss, which
we demonstrate improves GFlowNet conver-
gence. Each method can be recovered as a spe-
cific instance of LIR by choosing a procedure
to direct focus (attention and control). We
implement this algorithm for discrete PDGs
and study its properties on synthetically gen-
erated PDGs, comparing its behavior to the
global optimization semantics of the full PDG.
1 Introduction
Whatcausesonetochangetheirmind, tolearn, act, and
draw inferences? From a neurocognitive perspective,
the mind operates by resolving internal inconsistencies,
whether they arise from conflicting new information or
Proceedings of the 29thInternational Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2026, Tangier,
Morocco. PMLR: Volume 300. Copyright 2026 by the au-
thor(s).
from new awareness of contradictions among prior be-
liefs. Theories of cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1962)
famously explain much of human behavior as targeted
adjustments to dispel the discomfort of psychological
inconsistency. Predictive coding theories (Rao and
Ballard, 1999; Friston, 2005) posit that discrepancies
between expected and actual sensory inputs—known
as prediction errors—are treated as inconsistency sig-
nals that drive learning via local adjustments to neural
representation. Inspired by the deeper underlying neu-
rocognitive principle, we introduce a computational
framework that formalizes the process oflocal incon-
sistency resolution(LIR) in probabilistic models.
The locality—which manifests in two ways—is essential
for those of us with computational limitations. First, in-
consistency can be difficult to detect, and impossible to
address constructively unless it falls within our field of
attention. Second, we seldom have uniformcontrolover
our epistemic state; we are generally reluctant to revise
our direct observations or bedrock principles, forcing
us instead to adjust other more pliable beliefs. So in
practice, we resolve inconsistencieslocally—by looking
at only a small part of the model, and modifying only
a fraction of its parameters. This process isn’t guar-
anteed to succeed: some inconsistencies simply cannot
be seen or addressed with a narrow focus, and fixing
one inconsistency can easily create others out of view.
Nevertheless, we will show that LIR provides a power-
ful recipe for learning and (approximate) inference and
demonstrate that many foundational techniques in the
literature arise naturally as instances of it.
Our approach leans heavily on the theory of Proba-
bilistic Dependency Graphs (PDGs), which are highly
flexible graphical models capable of representing ar-
bitrary (even inconsistent) probabilistic information,
weighted by confidence (Richardson and Halpern, 2021).
There is a natural way to measure how inconsistent
a PDG is, and many standard loss functions can be
arXiv:2604.17140v1  [cs.AI]  18 Apr 2026
Local Inconsistency Resolution: The Interplay between Attention and Control in Probabilistic Models
viewed as measuring the inconsistency of a PDG that
describes the appropriate situation (Richardson, 2022).
LIR operationalizes training models as the process of
adjusting parameters to resolve this inconsistency.
Computing a PDG’s degree of inconsistency is easy in
some cases, but it is often intractable and is NP-hard
in general (e.g., the log number of solutions to a SAT
problem and the log evidence of a latent variable model
can both be represented as PDG inconsistencies). The
problem is equivalent to inference in PDGs, which, like
for other graphical models, can be achieved in polyno-
mial time under the assumption of bounded tree-width
(Richardson et al., 2023). Variational inference (Blei
et al., 2017; Kingma and Welling, 2014; Jordan et al.,
1999) can be understood as the practice of adopting
extra beliefs to get an overapproximation of inconsis-
tency that is easier to calculate (Richardson, 2022).
Our approach also enables the opposite: focusing on
small parts of the graph at a time to address tractable
underapproximations of the global inconsistency.
2 Preliminaries and Parametric PDGs
Variables and Probability.We write VX for the
set of values that a (random) variable X can take
on, and∆ VX for the set of distributions overVX. A
conditional probability distribution (cpd) is a map
p(Y|X ) : VX→ ∆VY. If X = {X1, X2, . . .}i∈I is
an (indexed) set of variables, we regardX itself as a
variable that can take on joint settingsVX =Q
i∈I VXi.
If µ∈ ∆VX is a joint distribution andY⊆ X , we write
µ(Y)for the marginal ofµon the variablesY.
Adirected hypergraph( N,A )is a set of nodesN and a
set of arcsA, each a∈ A of which is associated with a
set Sa ⊆N of source nodes, andTa ⊆N target nodes.
We also writeS a→T∈ A to specify an arca together
with its sourcesS=S a and targetsT=T a.
Geometry.For our purposes, apointed parameter
spaceΘis a convex subset of Rn for some n≥ 0
(that may differ between parameter spaces) with a
distinguished default valueθ0 ∈ Θ. Avector fieldover
Θis a differentiable map X assigning to eachθ∈ Θa
vector Xθ ∈R n. Thegradientof a twice differentiable
map f : Θ →R , which we write∇Θf(Θ), is a vector
field. Given a vector fieldX and an initial pointθ0 ∈
Θ, there is a unique trajectory y(t)that solves the
ordinary differential equation (ODE){ d
dt y(t) = Xy(t),
y(0) = θ0}. To refer to that solution compactly, we
adopt the notationexpθ0(X) := y(1). Although exp
may appear to give us access only toy(1), it is easily
verified that expθ0(tX) = y(t)for all t≥ 0. Putting
all the pieces together: the mapt7→exp θ(t∇Θf(Θ))
is the smooth path beginning at θ that follows the
gradient off. It is known asgradient flow.
Probabilistic Dependency Graphs.A PDG is a di-
rected (hyper)graph whose arcs carry probabilistic and
causal information, weighted by confidence (Richard-
son and Halpern, 2021). We define an unweighted (but
for our purposes, equivalent) variant whose explicit
parametric nature will prove useful.
Definition 1.Anunweighted parametric PDG M(Θ)
= (X,A, Θ={Θa}a∈A,P={Pa}a∈A)is a directed hyper-
graph( X,A )whose nodes X are variables, and whose
arcs a∈ A are each associated with a parameter space
Θa and a mapPa : Θa ×VS a → ∆VTa that gives a cpd
Pa(Ta|Sa; θ)over a’s target variables given values of its
sources and a parameter settingθ∈Θ a.
An unweighted PDG is the object obtained by fixing
the parameters: a joint setting θ = ( θa)a∈A yields
a concrete unweighted PDGM = M(θ)—which, at
a syntactic level, is just a collection of cpds. When
constructing PDGs from known cpds (e.g.,p(Y|X )),
we use the mathematical symbol representing that cpd
(e.g., p) for both the arca and its associated cpdPa.
We typically depict (parametric) PDGs in graphical
notation, specifying a cpd
pθ(Y|X, Z)as YX
Z p andq θ(A, B)as
A
B
q .
A PDG can be faithfully viewed as the special case
of a parametric PDG in which each parameter space
Θa = {θ0} is a singleton containing only the default
value. Conversely, a parametric PDG may be viewed
as a PDG by adding eachΘa as an explicit variable.
PDG Semantics and Inconsistency.The power
of PDGs comes from their semantics, which sew their
(possibly inconsistent) cpds and confidences together
to describe features of a joint distributionµ(X).
A PDG contains two kinds of information: qualitative
structure, encoding the types of causal mechanisms
(the hypergraph A), and observational data, in the
form of specific probabilistic beliefs (the cpdsP). In
the standard presentation (Richardson, 2024), a PDG
also comes with weight vectorsα,β∈ RA over the arcs,
encoding confidence in information of each type:αa
can be thought of as the number of independent causal
mechanisms by whichSa determines Ta (Richardson
et al., 2024), whileβa can be thought of as the effective
number of independent reports endorsing that the prob-
ability ofTa given Sa is Pa. Corresponding to these two
types of information, PDG semantics provide a way of
scoring compatibility of a joint distributionµ(X )with
information of each type.
With respect to a PDGM, theobservational incompat-
ibilityof a joint probability measureµ∈ ∆VX is given
by a weighted sum of relative entropy (KL) terms
OIncM(µ) :=
X
S a→T∈A
βa I D

µ(T, S)
 Pa(T|S)µ(S)

,(1)
Richardson, Samiei, Shakerinava, Viviano, El Kabid, Parviz, Bengio
where I D(p∥q ) = Ex∼p[log p(x)
q(x) ]. This quantity can
be thought of as the excess cost of using codes opti-
mized for our beliefsP weighted by the confidenceβ
we have in them, when in factX ∼µ . If β> 0, then
OIncM(µ) = 0if and only if µ satisfies the constraints
imposed by every cpd ofP. Intuitively, the cpds of
P are inconsistent when constraints are not simulta-
neously satisfiable, in which case theobservational
inconsistency ⟨ ⟨M⟩ ⟩0 := inf µ OIncM(µ)is an important
measure of the magnitude of the unavoidable internal
conflict between the probabilistic data inM.
Modern machine learning usually prizes observational
data above all else—in particular, above structural
information such as causal influence or qualitative in-
dependencies. For this reason, the scoring function
OIncand the corresponding observational inconsistency
⟨ ⟨M⟩ ⟩0 will suffice for most of our examples. That said,
we can also scoreµby its incompatibility with the struc-
tural information in the weighted hypergraph(A,α ).
Thisstructural deficiency(SDef) is given by:1
SDefA,α(µ) :=−H(X) +
X
a∈A
αa H(Ta |S a),(2)
and, roughly speaking, measures µ’s failure to arise
as a result of an independent causal mechanism along
each hyperarc (Richardson et al., 2024). IfA is a quali-
tative Bayesian Network andα =1, for instance, then
SDefA,α(µ) ≥ 0with equality iff µ has the conditional
independencies of A. With confidence γ≥ 0in the
structural information overall, theγ-inconsistencyof
M is the smallest possible overall incompatibility of
any distribution withM, and denoted


M

γ := inf
µ

OIncM(µ) +γSDef (A,α)(µ)

.(3)
Richardson (2022) argues that this inconsistency mea-
sure(3)is a “universal” loss function, largely by showing
how it specializes to standard loss functions across a
wide breadth of contexts. It follows that, at least at an
abstract level, much of machine learning can be viewed
as inconsistency resolution. We now take this idea a
few steps further, by operationalizing the resolution
process and allowing it to be done “locally”.
3 The Local Inconsistency Resolution
(LIR) Algorithm
There are two distinct senses in which inconsistency
resolution can belocal: we can restrict what we can see,
1If the underlying variables are continuous, then we
redefine entropy as follows. Assume each variable comes
with a base measureλ, like the Lebesgue or counting mea-
sure. Then defineHµ(X) := Eµ[log dµ(X)
dλX
], where dµ
dλ is the
Radon-Nikodym derivative ofµ(X)with respect toλ X.
or what we can do about it. Correspondingly, there
are two “focus” knobs for our algorithm: one restricts
ourattentionto the inconsistency of a subset of arcs
A⊆ A , and the other restricts ourcontrolto only the
parameters of a subsetC⊆ A of arcs as we resolve that
inconsistency. The former makes for an underestimate
of the inconsistency that is easier to calculate, while the
latter makes for an easier optimization problem. These
restrictions are not just cheap approximations, though:
they are also appropria