Knowledge-augmented Graph Machine Learning for Drug Discovery: A Survey
ZHIQIANG ZHONG, Aarhus University, Denmark
ANASTASIA BARKOVA,WhiteLab Genomics, France
DAVIDE MOTTIN, Aarhus University, Denmark
The integration of Artificial Intelligence into the field of drug discovery has been a growing area of interdisciplinary scientific research.
As of late, Graph Machine Learning (GML) has gained considerable attention for its exceptional ability to model graph-structured
biomedical data and investigate their properties and functional relationships. Despite extensive efforts, GML methods still suffer from
several deficiencies, such as the limited ability to handle supervision sparsity and provide interpretability in learning and inference
processes. In response, recent studies have proposed integrating external biomedical knowledge into the GML pipeline to realise
more precise and interpretable drug discovery with scarce training data. Nevertheless, a systematic definition for this burgeoning
research direction is yet to be established. This survey formally summarises Knowledge-augmented Graph Machine Learning (KaGML)
for drug discovery and organises collected KaGML works into four categories following a novel-defined taxonomy. We also present a
comprehensive overview of long-standing drug discovery principles and provide the foundational concepts and cutting-edge techniques
for graph-structured data and knowledge databases. To facilitate research in this promptly emerging field, we share collected practical
resources that are valuable for intelligent drug discovery and provide an in-depth discussion of the potential avenues for future
advancements.
CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Machine learning algorithms; Neural networks.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Graph Machine Learning, Knowledge-augmented Methods, Drug Discovery, Knowledge Database,
Knowledge Graph
ACM Reference Format:
Zhiqiang Zhong, Anastasia Barkova, and Davide Mottin. 2023. Knowledge-augmented Graph Machine Learning for Drug Discovery: A
Survey. 1, 1 (July 2023), 37 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 Introduction
Drug discovery and development have been one of the most prominent and challenging research tasks for decades [76,
111, 208]. Prior to a drug being marketed and distributed to patients, it must undergo a multitude of research validations.
From initial early drug discovery to preclinical development, and subsequent to clinical trials and final regulatory
approval, it usually takes 10-15 years and costs around 2 billion US dollars [42, 146, 225]. To reduce the financial burden
and increase the success rate, researchers have been working on accelerating drug discovery by taking advantage of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques [46, 63, 86, 203, 244]. Technological advances now allow for the creation of vast
amounts of data in areas such as genomics, proteomics, and imaging, which can be used to inform the drug discovery
process [28, 46, 173].
Authors’ Contact Information: Zhiqiang Zhong, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, zzhong@cs.au.dk; Anastasia Barkova, WhiteLab Genomics, Paris,
France, barkova.anastasia@gmail.com; Davide Mottin, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, davide@cs.au.dk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2023 ACM.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM 1
arXiv:2302.08261v3  [cs.LG]  24 Jul 2024
2 Zhong et al.
(a) Biomedical Data are Graphs(b) Human 