Abstract
This paper is about the problem of learning a stochastic policy for generating
an object (like a molecular graph) from a sequence of actions, such that the
probability of generating an object is proportional to a given positive reward for
that object. Whereas standard return maximization tends to converge to a single
return-maximizing sequence, there are cases where we would like to sample a
diverse set of high-return solutions. These arise, for example, in black-box function
optimization when few rounds are possible, each with large batches of queries,
where the batches should be diverse, e.g., in the design of new molecules. One
can also see this as a problem of approximately converting an energy function to a
generative distribution. While MCMC methods can achieve that, they are expensive
and generally only perform local exploration. Instead, training a generative policy
amortizes the cost of search during training and yields to fast generation. Using
insights from Temporal Difference learning, we propose GFlowNet, based on a
view of the generative process as a ﬂow network, making it possible to handle the
tricky case where different trajectories can yield the same ﬁnal state, e.g., there
are many ways to sequentially add atoms to generate some molecular graph. We
cast the set of trajectories as a ﬂow and convert the ﬂow consistency equations into
a learning objective, akin to the casting of the Bellman equations into Temporal
Difference methods. We prove that any global minimum of the proposed objectives
yields a policy which samples from the desired distribution, and demonstrate the
improved performance and diversity of GFlowNet on a simple domain where there
are many modes to the reward function, and on a molecule synthesis task.
1 Introduction
The maximization of expected return R in reinforcement learning (RL) is generally achieved by
putting all the probability mass of the policyπ on the highest-return sequence of actions. In this paper,
we study the scenario where our objective is not to generate the single highest-reward sequence of
actions but rather to sample a distribution of trajectories whose probability is proportional to a given
positive return or reward function. This can be useful in tasks where exploration is important, i.e., we
want to sample from the leading modes of the return function. This is equivalent to the problem of
turning an energy function into a corresponding generative model, where the object to be generated is
obtained via a sequence of actions. By changing the temperature of the energy function (i.e., scaling
it multiplicatively) or by taking the power of the return, one can control how selective the generator
should be, i.e., only generate from around the highest modes at low temperature or explore more with
a higher temperature.
A motivating application for this setup is iterative black-box optimization where the learner has
access to an oracle which can compute a reward for a large batch of candidates at each round, e.g., in
drug-discovery applications. Diversity of the generated candidates is particularly important when the
oracle is itself uncertain, e.g., it may consist of cellular assays which is a cheap proxy for clinical
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
arXiv:2106.04399v2  [cs.LG]  19 Nov 2021
trials, or it may consist of the result of a docking simulation (estimating how well a candidate small
molecule binds to a target protein) which is a proxy for more accurate but more expensive downstream
evaluations (like cellular assays or in-vivo assays in mice).
When calling the oracle is expensive (e.g. it involves a biological experiment), a standard way (Anger-
mueller et al., 2020) to apply machine learning in such exploration settings is to take the data already
collected from the oracle (say a set of (x,y ) pairs wherex is a candidate solution an y is a scalar
evaluation ofx from the oracle) and train a supervised proxyf (viewed as a simulator) which predicts
y fromx. The function f or a variant off which incorporates uncertainty about its value, like in
Bayesian optimization (Srinivas et al., 2010; Negoescu et al., 2011), can then be used as a reward
functionR to train a generative model or a policy that will produce a batch of candidates for the
next experimental assays. Searching for x which maximizes R(x) is not sufﬁcient because we
would like to sample for the batch of queries a representative set ofx’s with high values ofR, i.e.,
around modes ofR(x). Note that alternative ways to obtain diversity exist, e.g., with batch Bayesian
optimization (Kirsch et al., 2019). An advantage of the proposed approach is that the computational
cost is linear in the size of the batch (by opposition with methods which compare pairs of candidates,
which is at least quadratic). With the possibility of assays of a hundred thousand candidates using
synthetic biology, linear scaling would be a great advantage.
In this paper, we thus focus on the speciﬁc machine learning problem of turning a given positive
reward or return function into a generative policy which samples with a probability propor-
tional to the return. In applications like the one mentioned above, we only apply the reward function
after having generated a candidate, i.e., the reward is zero except in a terminal state, and the return is
the terminal reward. We are in the so-called episodic setting of RL.
The proposed approach views the probability assigned to an action given a state as the ﬂow associated
with a network whose nodes are states, and outgoing edges from that node are deterministic transitions
driven by an action (not to be confused with normalizing ﬂows; Rezende and Mohamed (2016)).
The total ﬂow into the network is the sum of the rewards in the terminal states (i.e., a partition
function) and can be shown to be the ﬂow at the root node (or start state). The proposed algorithm is
inspired by Bellman updates and converges when the incoming and outgoing ﬂow into and out of
each state match. A policy which chooses an action with probability proportional to the outgoing ﬂow
corresponding to that action is proven to achieve the desired result, i.e., the probability of sampling a
terminal state is proportional to its reward. In addition, we show that the resulting setup is off-policy;
it converges to the above solution even if the training trajectories come from a different policy, so
long as it has large enough support on the state space.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose GFlowNet, a novel generative method for unnormalized probability distributions
based on ﬂow networks and local ﬂow-matching conditions: the ﬂow incoming to a state must
match the outgoing ﬂow.
• We prove crucial properties of GFlowNet, including the link between the ﬂow-matching
conditions (which many training objectives can provide) and the resulting match of the
generated policy with the target reward function. We also prove its ofﬂine properties and
asymptotic convergence (if the training objective can be minimized). We also demonstrate
that previous related work (Buesing et al., 2019) which sees the generative process like a tree
would fail when there are many action sequences which can lead to the same state.
• We demonstrate on synthetic data the usefulness of departing from seeking one mode of the
return, and instead seeking to model the entire distribution and all its modes.
• We successfully apply GFlowNet to a large scale molecule synthesis domain, with comparative
experiments against PPO and MCMC methods.
All implementations are available at https://github.com/bengioe/gflownet.
2 Approximating Flow Network generative models with a TD-like objective
Consider a discrete setX and policyπ(a|s) to sequentially buildx∈X with probabilityπ(x) with
π(x)≈ R(x)
Z = R(x)∑
x′∈XR(x′) (1)
2
whereR(x)> 0 is a reward for a terminal statex. This would be useful to sample novel drug-like
molecules when given a reward functionR that scores molecules based on their chemical properties.
Being able to sample from the high modes ofR(x) would provide diversity in the batches of generated
molecules sent to assays. This is in contrast with the typical RL objective of maximizing return which
we have found to often end up focusing around one or very few good molecules. In our context,R(x)
is a proxy for the actual values obtained from assays, which means it can be called often and cheaply.
R(x) is retrained or ﬁne-tuned each time we acquire new data from the assays.
What method should one use to generate batches sampled fromπ(x)∝R(x)? Let’s ﬁrst think of the
state space under which we would operate.
LetS denote the set of states andX⊂S denote the set of terminal states. LetA be a ﬁnite set, the
alphabet,A(s)⊆A be the set of allowed actions at states, and letA∗(s) be the set of all sequences
of actions allowed after states. To every action sequence⃗ a= (a1,a 2,a 3,...,a h) ofai∈A,h≤H
corresponds a singlex, i.e. the environment is deterministic so we can deﬁne a functionC mapping a
sequence of actions⃗ ato anx. If such a sequence is ‘incomplete’ we deﬁne its reward to be 0. When
the correspondence between action sequences and states is bijective, a states is uniquely described
by some sequence⃗ a, and we can visualize the generative process as the traversal of a tree from a
single root node to a leaf corresponding to the sequence of actions along the way.
However, when this correspondence is non-injective, i.e. when multiple action sequences describe
the samex, things get trickier. Instead of a tree, we get a directed acyclic graph or DAG (assuming that
the sequences must be of ﬁnite length, i.e., there are no deterministic cycles), as illustrated in Figure 1.
For example, and of interest here, molecules can be seen as graphs, which can be described in
multiple orders (canonical representations such as SMILES strings also have this problem: there may
be multiple descriptions for the same actual molecule). The standard approach to such a sampling
problem is to use iterative MCMC methods (Xie et al., 2021; Grathwohl et al., 2021). Another
option is to relax the desire to havep(x)∝R(x) and to use non-interative (sequential) RL methods
(Gottipati et al., 2020), but these are at high risk of getting stuck in local maxima and of missing
modes. Indeed, in our setting, the policy which maximizes the expected return (which is the expected
ﬁnal reward) generates the sequence with the highest return (i.e., a single molecule).
2.1 Flow Networks
In this section we propose the Generative Flow Network framework, or GFlowNet, which enables us
to learn policies such thatp(x)∝R(x) when sampled. We ﬁrst discuss why existing methods are
inadequate, and then show how we can use the metaphor of ﬂows, sinks and sources, to construct
adequate policies. We then show that such policies can be learned via a ﬂow-matching objective.
With existing methods in the bijective case, one can think of the sequential generation of onex as an
episode in a tree-structured deterministic MDP, where all leavesx are terminal states (with reward
R(x)) and the root is initial states0. Interestingly, in such a case one can express the pseudo-value of
a state ˜V (s) as the sum of all the rewards of the descendants ofs (Buesing et al., 2019).
In the non-injective case, these methods are inadequate. Constructing π(τ )≈ R(τ )/Z, e.g. as
per Buesing et al. (2019), MaxEnt RL (Haarnoja et al., 2017), or via an autoregressive method (Nash
and Durkan, 2019; Shi et al., 2021) has a particular problem as shown below: if multiple action
sequences⃗ a(i.e. multiple trajectoriesτ) lead to a ﬁnal statex, then a serious bias can be introduced
in the generative probabilities. Let us denote ⃗ a+⃗b as the concatenation of the two sequences of
actions⃗ aand⃗b, and by extensions +⃗b the state reached by applying the actions in⃗b from states.
Proposition 1. Let C : A∗ ↦→ Sassociate each allowed action sequence ⃗ 