Abstract
We present a new kind of question answering
dataset, OpenBookQA, modeled after open
book exams for assessing human understand-
ing of a subject. The open book that comes
with our questions is a set of 1326 elementary
level science facts. Roughly 6000 questions
probe an understanding of these facts and their
application to novel situations. This requires
combining an open book fact (e.g., metals con-
duct electricity) with broad common knowl-
edge (e.g., a suit of armor is made of metal) ob-
tained from other sources. While existing QA
datasets over documents or knowledge bases,
being generally self-contained, focus on lin-
guistic understanding, OpenBookQA probes a
deeper understanding of both the topic—in the
context of common knowledge—and the lan-
guage it is expressed in. Human performance
on OpenBookQA is close to 92%, but many
state-of-the-art pre-trained QA methods per-
form surprisingly poorly, worse than several
simple neural baselines we develop. Our or-
acle experiments designed to circumvent the
knowledge retrieval bottleneck demonstrate
the value of both the open book and additional
facts. We leave it as a challenge to solve the
retrieval problem in this multi-hop setting and
to close the large gap to human performance.
1 Introduction
Open book exams are a common mechanism
for assessing human understanding of a subject,
where test takers are allowed free access to a rel-
evant book, study guide, or class notes when an-
swering questions. In this context, the goal is not
to evaluate memorization but a deeper understand-
ing of the material and its application to new situa-
tions (Jenkins, 1995; Landsberger, 1996). The ap-
plication, in turn, often requires combining a fact
in the book (e.g., metals conduct electricity) with
additional common knowledge the test taker is ex-
Question:
Which of these would let the most heat travel through?
A) a new pair of jeans.
B) a steel spoon in a cafeteria.
C) a cotton candy at a store.
D) a calvin klein cotton hat.
Science Fact:
Metal is a thermal conductor.
Common Knowledge:
Steel is made of metal.
Heat travels through a thermal conductor.
Figure 1: An example for a question with a given set
of choices and supporting facts.
pected to have acquired by this stage (e.g., a suit
of armor is made of metal).
Motivated by this setting, we present a new kind
of question answering dataset, OpenBookQA, 1
that consists of two parts: Q, a set of 5957
multiple-choice questions, andF, a set of 1326 di-
verse facts about elementary level science. F has
three key characteristics of an ‘open book’: (a) it
forms the basis for generating Q; (b) it has been
deemed central to scientiﬁc explanations (Jansen
et al., 2018); and (c) by itself, F is generally in-
sufﬁcient to answer questions inQ. Faced with a
questionq∈Q , a student or systemS is expected
retrieve a relevant factf∈F , and appeal to their
own common knowledge,KS, when applyingf to
answerq.
Figure 1 provides an example. Here, metals are
thermal conductors is a core scientiﬁc fact avail-
able inF. One way to apply this fact to decide
whether a steel spoon would let the most heat
travel through is to appeal to common knowledge
that steel is metallic and heat travels through ther-
mal conductors. In general, the expected common
knowledge is relatively simple (taxonomic facts,
1The dataset and the code for the models are available at
http://data.allenai.org/OpenBookQA.
arXiv:1809.02789v1  [cs.CL]  8 Sep 2018
deﬁnitions, object properties, etc.); the difﬁculty
lies in identifying it and meaningfully combining
it with a core fact fromF to answer the question.
OpenBookQA questions are challenging as they
require multi-hop reasoning with partial context
provided by F. Speciﬁcally, unlike existing
datasets for reading comprehension (RC), answer-
ing questions on the back of a textbook (TQA), 2
as well as question answering over structured
knowledge-bases (KBQA), the open book F that
comes with OpenBookQA is not self-contained.
A successful system must therefore go beyond
the typical challenges such as paraphrase match-
ing and coreference resolution, without beneﬁting
from the canonicalized and complete information
in KBQA.
Generating interesting open book questions is
a difﬁcult task. We used a multi-stage process
starting withF, using crowd-sourcing to generate
(noisy) questions based onF that probe novel sit-
uations, using an automatic ﬁlter to ensure hard-
ness for retrieval and association based systems,
using a crowd ﬁlter to ensure answerability by a
lay person, and further using an expert ﬁlter to en-
sure higher quality in Dev and Test sets.
We evaluate a number of existing QA systems
for science (without retraining) on OpenBookQA,
ﬁnding that they perform surprisingly close to the
random guessing baseline of 25%. Human perfor-
mance, on the other hand, is close to 92%.3
Motivated by recent ﬁndings of gameability of
NLP datasets (Gururangan et al., 2018), we also
develop and evaluate simple, attention-based, neu-
ral baselines including aplausible answer detector
(which ignores the question text completely) and
an odd-one-out solver. These highlight inevitable
human bias in any crowdsourced dataset, increas-
ing performance on OpenBookQA to 48%.
Building upon a recent neural model for incor-
porating external knowledge in the story cloze set-
ting (Mihaylov and Frank, 2018), we propose a
knowledge-aware neural baseline that can utilize
both the open bookF and common knowledge re-
trieved from sources such as ConceptNet (Speer
et al., 2017). While retrieving the most useful
pieces of knowledge remains an open challenge,
our ‘oracle’ experiments with the factf used while
generating a question q and an interpretation (by
2Only∼5% of the TQA questions of Kembhavi et al.
(2017) require additional common knowledge.
3To avoid ambiguity in the term ‘human performance’,
Section 3.2 describes the speciﬁc randomized model we use.
the question author) of the additional knowledge
k needed for q, provides valuable insight into the
nature of this dataset: Facts from the open bookF
are valuable (5% improvement) but not sufﬁcient.
Using bothf andk increases the accuracy to 76%,
but is still far from human level performance, sug-
gesting the need for non-trivial reasoning to com-
bine these facts.
To encourage further research on this new task,
for each Train and Dev questionq, OpenBookQA
also includesf as intermediate supervision signal,
which may be viewed as a partial explanation for
q. We leave closing the large gap to human perfor-
mance as a challenge for the NLP community.
2 Related Work
By construction, answering OpenBookQA ques-
tions requires (i) some base science facts from
a provided ‘open book’, (ii) broader understand-
ing about the world (common or commonsense
knowledge), and (iii) an ability to combine these
facts (reasoning). This setup differs from several
existing QA tasks, as summarized below.
Reading Comprehension (RC) datasets have
been proposed as benchmarks to evaluate the abil-
ity of systems to understand a document by an-
swering factoid-style questions over this docu-
ment. These datasets have taken various forms:
multiple-choice (Richardson et al., 2013), cloze-
style (Hermann et al., 2015; Onishi et al., 2016;
Hill et al., 2016), and span prediction (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016; Trischler et al., 2017; Joshi et al.,
2017) However, analysis (Chen et al., 2016; Sug-
awara et al., 2017) of these datasets has shown that
many of the questions can be solved with context
token matching (Chen et al., 2017a; Weissenborn
et al., 2017) or relatively simple paraphrasing.
To focus on the more challenging problem
of reasoning across sentences, new datasets
have been proposed for multi-step RC. QAnga-
roo (Welbl et al., 2018) have used a knowledge-
base to identify entity pairs (s, o) with a known
relation, r, which is also supported by a multi-
hop path in a set of documents. They use struc-
tured tuple queries (s, r, ?) and use all the docu-
ments along the path as the input passage. Nar-
rativeQA (Kocisk´y et al., 2017) is an RC dataset
that has been shown to require an iterative reason-
ing about the narrative of a story. Similar to Open-
BookQA, the questions were generated to ensure
that the answer is not a direct match or paraphrase
that can be retrieved with an IR approach. Most
recently, Khashabi et al. (2018) proposed Mul-
tiRC, a multiple-choice RC dataset that is de-
signed to require multi-sentence reasoning and can
have multiple correct answers. Again, like most
RC datasets, it is self-contained.
Tasks with external knowledge. While many
of the RC datasets could beneﬁt from common-
sense or background knowledge, they are designed
to be self-contained, i.e., solvable by the document
context alone. Datasets such as the Story Cloze
Test (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016), MCScript,4 and
ProPara (Mishra et al., 2018) do require addi-
tional domain knowledge about everyday events,
scripts, and processes, respectively. However,
these datasets need domain-speciﬁc modeling of
events, whereas OpenBookQA appeals to broad
common knowledge cutting across a variety of
types and topics.
Stasaski and Hearst (2017) explore the creation
of multi-hop questions and propose generating
stronger distractors for the multiple-choice setting.
Their work, however, starts with structured knowl-
edge, speciﬁcally a Biology ontology.
Lastly, many Science Question Answering
datasets (e.g. Clark et al., 2016, 2018) have been
released that need broad external knowledge to
answer the questions. However, these questions
are not associated with a core set of facts, i.e., an
“open book” used to deﬁne these questions. As
a result, the questions vary widely in style and
complexity (Clark et al., 2018). In contrast, Open-
BookQA focuses on a more well-deﬁned subset of
science QA, appealing to one core fact from the
open book and one (or few) relatively simple com-
monly known supporting facts.
3 OpenBookQA Dataset
The OpenBookQA dataset consists of about 6,000
4-way multiple-choice questions, each associated
with one core fact from a “book” F of 1326 such
facts, and an auxiliary set K of about 6000 ad-
ditional facts. The questions were created via a
multi-stage crowdsourcing and partial expert ﬁl-
tering process, discussed in Section 3.1.
The small “book” F consists of recurring sci-
ence themes and principles, each of which can be
(and here is) instantiated into multiple questions.
4SemEval-2018 Task 11: Machine Comprehension using
Commonsense Knowledge https://competitions.
codalab.org/competitions/17184
ForF, we use a subset of the WorldTree corpus
which Jansen et al. (2018) have analyzed for suf-
ﬁciency for elementary level science. The subset
we use is taken from the 2287 WorldTree facts that
were marked as “central” by the original authors
in at least one explanation. We further ﬁlter them
down to 1326 that appear general enough to be ap-
plicable to multiple situations.
OpenBookQA additionally requires broad com-
mon knowledge, which is expected to come from
large corpora, such as ConceptNet, Wikipedia, or
a corpus with 14M science-related sentences used
by some existing baselines. The crowdsourcing
process below also asks workers to mark a second
fact,k, needed for each question q, in addition to
f. These second facts, unfortunately, were often
incomplete, over-complete, or only distantly re-
lated to q. We thus include in OpenBookQA the
setK of such second facts only as auxiliary data
for optional use. We emphasize thatK should not
be viewed as ‘gold’ additional facts, or as a substi-
tute for broad common knowledge.
3.1 Crowdsourcing Process
The overall question generation and ﬁltering
pipeline is summarized in Figure 2. Given the
“book” F of core facts, the process proceeds as
follows, starting with an empty question set Qs
and an empty ‘second facts’ setK:
1. A crowd-worker 5 w is shown a random sci-
ence factf from the setF.