Abstract
In domains with interdependent data, such as graphs, quantifying the epistemic
uncertainty of a Graph Neural Network (GNN) is challenging as uncertainty can
arise at different structural scales. Existing techniques neglect this issue or only
distinguish between structure-aware and structure-agnostic uncertainty without
combining them into a single measure. We propose GEBM, an energy-based model
(EBM) that provides high-quality uncertainty estimates by aggregating energy at
different structural levels that naturally arise from graph diffusion. In contrast
to logit-based EBMs, we provably induce an integrable density in the data space
by regularizing the energy function. We introduce an evidential interpretation of
our EBM that significantly improves the predictive robustness of the GNN. Our
framework is a simple and effective post hoc method applicable to any pre-trained
GNN that is sensitive to various distribution shifts. It consistently achieves the best
separation of in-distribution and out-of-distribution data on 6 out of 7 anomaly
types while having the best average rank over shifts on all datasets.
1 Introduction
Quantifying and understanding uncertainty is crucial to developing safe and reliable machine learning
systems. Many applications such as Reinforcement Learning [42], Active Learning [5, 31] or Out-
of-Distribution detection [60] benefit from disentangling different facets of uncertainty [54, 17, 46].
Typically, one distinguishes between an irreducible aleatoric component and reducible epistemic
factors [29]. The former is inherent to the data, while the latter is rooted in a lack of knowledge. One
way to quantify epistemic uncertainty is to define a classifier-dependent density over the data domain
[55]. High values indicate similarity to the training data and thus imply low epistemic uncertainty.
Energy-based models (EBMs) induce this density by defining an energy function that assumes low
values near the training data [38]. A common choice is the logits of the classifier as their magnitude
is supposed to correlate with the model confidence [ 40]. However, many architectures have been
shown to produce arbitrarily overconfident predictions far from the training data [28]. The negative
implications for logit-based EBMs are only scarcely discussed in the literature [35, 36].
While substantial effort has been directed toward uncertainty estimation for independent and identi-
cally distributed (i.i.d.) problems [1, 24, 49, 37, 6, 22], graphs have only recently received attention
within the community [71, 64, 67, 21]. There, uncertainty can arise at different structural scales, e.g.,
from only a single node, clusters, or global properties. Previous work only accounts for this implicitly
by applying techniques from i.i.d. domains to Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [67, 49]. A recent ap-
proach distinguishes only between structure-aware and structure-agnostic uncertainty [64] while not
combining them into a single measure, which is often required in downstream applications [42, 54].
Consequently, estimates are often only sensitive to shifts that match their structural resolution. They
may overfit certain anomaly types and not be reliable in general.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
arXiv:2406.04043v3  [cs.LG]  26 Feb 2025
Independent
??
?
Softmin
Graph Diffusion
“Softmax”Gaussian Regularization
LocalGroup
Epistemic Uncertainty
Softmin
Graph Diffusion
Softmin
??
??
𝑓!
𝑓!𝒢"
𝑓!𝒢#
𝑓!𝒢$
Graph 𝒢 with Anomalies
Figure 1: Overview of the Graph Energy-based Model (GEBM). Graph-agnostic energy (uncertainty)
of a trained GNN fθ(G) is first regularized to mitigate overconfidence and then aggregated at a local,
cluster, and structure-independent scale by interleaving energy marginalization and graph diffusion.
While group energy marginalizes before diffusion, local energy is fine-grained and can pick up
conflicting evidence. GEBM assigns high uncertainty to several anomaly types simultaneously.
We address these shortcomings and propose a novel graph-based EBM (GEBM) that is structure-
aware at different levels. The core idea behind GEBM is to define energy functions at different
structural abstractions and facilitate the flexibility of the EBMs to aggregate them into a single,
theoretically grounded measure. Interestingly, we find that interleaving a graph diffusion process
with energy marginalization gives rise to energy functions that naturally capture patterns of different
granularity. As depicted in Figure 1, we utilize three energy types: (i) Group energy corresponds to
evidence smoothing and emphasizes anomalies clusters within the graph while not distinguishing
between their type locally. (ii) Local energy is more granular and sensitive to evidence disagreements
in the neighborhood of a node. (iii) Independent energy is fully structure-agnostic and describes
patterns that are limited to individual nodes. Aggregating them using soft maximum selection induces
a single energy measure that assigns high uncertainty to anomalies at various scales. A Gaussian
regularizer provably ensures that GEBM converges to low confidence far from the training data.
We evaluate GEBM over an extensive suite of datasets, distribution shifts, and baselines1. It consis-
tently exhibits state-of-the-art performance in detecting out-of-distribution (o.o.d.) instances, while
other approaches are only effective in a subset of settings. On all datasets, GEBM ranks the best
on average over all distribution shifts. Beyond o.o.d. detection, we discover a novel theoretical
connection between EBMs and evidential models. This interpretation of GEBM enables the GNN
backbone to provide accurate predictions even under severe distribution shifts.
In summary, we tackle three main deficiencies of energy-based uncertainty for graphs by:
1. Proposing GEBM, an EBM that is aware of interdependence and provides a single uncer-
tainty estimate incorporating different structural scales.