Abstract
There are many frameworks for deep generative
modeling, each often presented with their own
speciﬁc training algorithms and inference meth-
ods. Here, we demonstrate the connections be-
tween existing deep generative models and the
recently introduced GFlowNet framework (Ben-
gio et al., 2021b), a probabilistic inference ma-
chine which treats sampling as a decision-making
process. This analysis sheds light on their over-
lapping traits and provides a unifying viewpoint
through the lens of learning with Markovian tra-
jectories. Our framework provides a means for
unifying training and inference algorithms, and
provides a route to shine a unifying light over
many generative models. Beyond this, we pro-
vide a practical and experimentally veriﬁed recipe
for improving generative modeling with insights
from the GFlowNet perspective.
1. Introduction
Generative models are a class of machine learning algo-
rithms that use probabilistic methods to capture and perform
inference over complex distributions, usually from a given
training dataset. They have a wide range of applications,
including data generation, anomaly detection, probabilistic
inference and density estimation. In the past few decades, a
variety of different generative models have been developed,
each with its own set of assumptions and capabilities.
Early examples of generative models include probabilistic
graphical models, such as Bayesian networks and Markov
random ﬁelds (Koller & Friedman, 2009; Murphy, 2012),
and latent variable models, such as latent Dirichlet alloca-
tion (Blei et al., 2001) and Helmholtz machines (Dayan
et al., 1995). These models have proven to be effective at
capturing dependencies within data.
The research on generative modeling has taken off during
1Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal2Facebook
AI Research (Meta AI) 3CIFAR. Correspondence to: Dinghuai
Zhang <dinghuai.zhang@mila.quebec>.
Preprint. Copyright 2023 by the authors.
the past decade, thanks to the representational power of
deep neural networks. One well-known example is the gen-
erative adversarial network or GAN for short(Goodfellow
et al., 2014), which consists of a generator network that
stochastically produces new samples and a deterministic
discriminator network that tries to distinguish between real
and generated samples. Another popular method is the
variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2013), which
learns a hierarchical latent variable model to express the
target distribution with the help of a variational posterior.
Other types of generative models based on deep networks
(deep generative models) include: normalizing ﬂows (Dinh
et al., 2014), which transform a simple distribution into a
target distribution using a series of invertible transforma-
tions; autoregressive (AR) models (Bengio & Bengio, 1999;
van den Oord et al., 2016), which model the distribution
of a sequence of data by decomposing it into a product of
conditional distributions; and energy-based models (Hin-
ton, 2002; LeCun et al., 2006), which models the negative
log probability of a distribution. Recently, denoising dif-
fusion models (Vincent, 2011; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) have shown impressive
results in generating high quality samples. Their modeling
could be seen as a series of denoising steps which gradually
transform white noise into noise-free data by stochastically
inverting the process of transforming real data into white
noise through a sequence of noise injection steps. Each of
these generative models has its own set of assumptions and
limitations, which can make it challenging to choose the
right model for a particular task (Hu et al., 2018).
GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a;b), short for generative
ﬂow networks, is a class of samplers which stems from a
reinforcement learning or RL for short (Sutton & Barto,
2005) formulation. GFlowNets treat the sampling process
as a sequential decision-making process, and learn a stochas-
tic (forward) policy to sample compositional objects with
probability proportional to a given terminating reward func-
tion. It has been demonstrated that GFlowNets are able
to sample from diverse modes rather than being stuck in
single modes like is typical of Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) or variational inference methods (Zhang et al.,
2022b; Malkin et al., 2023), which is of great importance in
drug discovery (Jain et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2021).
In this paper, we show how many existing generative models
arXiv:2209.02606v2  [cs.LG]  31 Jan 2023
Unifying Generative Models with GFlowNets and Beyond 2
could be taken as special cases of GFlowNets, with their
modeling components speciﬁed in different probabilistic
ways. We thus propose to treat the GFlowNet as a proba-
bilistic framework for unifying different kinds of generative
models, and facilitate the analysis of their connections and
possible extensions (Section 3). Further, after analysing the
relationship between GFlowNet setup and generative model-
ing setup in Section 4, we propose MLE-GFN, a generative
modeling algorithm inspired by GFlowNet ideas in Sec-
tion 5. The proposed algorithm improves the performances
of existing generative modeling baselines on both discrete
and continuous image modeling tasks.