Abstract
Solving complex mathematical problems via
system-2 reasoning is a natural human skill,
yet it remains a significant challenge for cur-
rent large language models (LLMs). We iden-
tify the scarcity of deliberate multi-step rea-
soning data as a primary limiting factor. To
this end, we introduce Enriched Instruction
Tuning (EIT), a method that enriches existing
human-annotated mathematical datasets by syn-
ergizing human and AI feedback to create fine-
grained reasoning trajectories. These datasets
are then used to fine-tune open-source LLMs,
enhancing their mathematical reasoning abili-
ties without reliance on any symbolic verifica-
tion program. Concretely, EIT is composed of
two critical steps: Enriching with Reasoning
Plan (ERP) and Enriching with Reasoning Step
(ERS). The former generates a high-level plan
that breaks down complex instructions into a
sequence of simpler objectives, while ERS fills
in reasoning contexts often overlooked by hu-
man annotators, creating a smoother reasoning
trajectory for LLM fine-tuning. Unlike exist-
ing CoT prompting methods that generate rea-
soning chains only depending on LLM’s inter-
nal knowledge, our method leverages human-
annotated initial answers as “meta-knowledge”
to help LLMs generate more detailed and pre-
cise reasoning processes, leading to a more
trustworthy LLM expert for complex mathemat-
ical problems. In experiments, EIT achieves an
accuracy of 84.1% on GSM8K and 32.5% on
MATH, surpassing state-of-the-art fine-tuning
and prompting methods, and even matching the
performance of tool-augmented methods.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly
recognized as a promising stride towards realiz-
ing Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) due to (1)
their potential for a wide range of intelligent ac-
tivities and (2) their scaling up of performance as
*Corresponding author
increased dataset size, model size, and computing
budget (Bubeck et al., 2023; Kaplan et al., 2020).
Surprisingly, all of the current advances in LLMs
are established on an embarrassingly “simple” train-
ing paradigm, i.e., Transformer decoder + next-
token prediction (Radford et al., 2018). Though
promising, the most powerful LLMs, e.g., GPT-
4 (Achiam et al., 2023), still frequently make ridicu-
lous mistakes when solving fundamental mathe-
matical problems, e.g., multiplication of four dig-
its (Hagendorff et al., 2022), hindering their us-
age in scenarios requiring mathematical reason-
ing, such as autonomous driving (Fu et al., 2024),
embodied intelligence (Brohan et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024), and teaching assis-
tance (Hicke et al., 2023). The root of this issue
is that LLM-generated responses entirely rely on
next-token prediction, a process akin to our intu-
itive, quick-thinking system-1 reasoning (Daniel,
2017). This is fine for easy tasks but falls short for
complex mathematical problems, in which humans
usually switch to thoughtful, logical system-2 rea-
soning, a slower and more deliberate way of think-
ing while making our answers more accurate and
less biased (Daniel, 2017)1.
The deficiency of system-2 mathematical rea-
soning in LLMs has motivated many recent works
that can be divided into two categories: fine-tuning-
based and prompting-based methods. Fine-tuning-
based methods, such as Phi-GSM (Liu et al., 2023),
MetaMath (Yu et al., 2023), MathGenie (Lu et al.,
2024), and Orca-Math (Mitra et al., 2024), update
LLMs’ parameters by distilling privileged LLMs
or learning from human’s reasoning trajectories.
Many of them adopt very complicated augmenta-
tion strategies in order to boost performance (see
1The general concept of System-2 reasoning is also em-
ployed by other work (LeCun, 2022; Weston and Sukhbaatar,
2023; Yu et al., 2024), which involves generating deliberate
and structured thought processes that enable a model (or hu-
man) to reason and plan effectively, thereby completing the
given task successfully.
1
arXiv:2412.16964v2  [cs.AI]  24 Dec 2024
Answer: (ERP) To find the largest possible value of b,
consider
(ERS) To solve this, we first express 1200 as a product of its 
prime factors:
1200 =  24 × 3 × 52
𝑏 = 31 × 52 = 3 × 25 = 75
 Therefore, the largest possible value of 𝑏 is 75. (
 )
(a) MetaMath
Factoring out the highest power of 2 from 
1200, we find that 
1200 = 2^4 ×  75.
Ground Truth
Answer: To find the largest possible value of b, we can 
follow two steps:
 1.Acknowledge that 𝑏 is an odd integer, which can be 
expressed as 2𝑘 + 1, where 𝑘 is an integer.
  2.Realize that to find the largest possible odd integer 𝑏, 
we need to find the largest value of 𝑘, since 𝑏 increases 
as 𝑘 increases.
Since 𝑏 is odd, it can be written as 2𝑘 + 1, 
where 𝑘 is an integer. 
Thus, 
    𝑎𝑏 =  𝑎(2𝑘 + 1)  =  2𝑎𝑘 +  𝑎 =  1200. 
As 𝑎 is an integer, the largest possible value of 𝑏 is when 
𝑎 = 1, in which case 𝑏 = 1200 (and 𝑘 = 599).
If 𝑏 is any larger, then 𝑎 becomes a fraction, so 𝑏 =
1200 is the largest possible value. 
Therefore, the largest possible value of 𝑏 is 1200 (
 )
Answer: Since 𝑎 is an integer, 𝑏 must be a 
factor of 1200.
The prime factorization of 1200 is 23 ×
3 × 52.
To maximize 𝑏, we want to choose the 
largest power of 5, which is 52 = 25.
Therefore, the largest possible value of 𝑏 is 
25. 
The answer is: 25. (
 )
(b)  CoT (c)  EIT
Since b is an odd integer, it cannot include the factor of 2 that
is present in the prime factorization of 1200. Therefore, b must
be composed only of the odd prime factors of 1200, which are 
3 and 5. To maximize 𝑏, we should use the highest powers of   
these primes that are factors of 1200.
The highest power of 3 that divides 1200 is 𝟑𝟏, and the highest
power of 5 is 𝟓𝟐. Multiplying these together gives us the largest
consider the prime factorization of 1200 and the fact that b
must be odd. Since b cannot include the factor of 2 present in
1200, the largest odd factor of 1200 that can be b is the product
possible value for 𝒃 :
of the odd prime factors raised to the appropriate power.
Question: The product 𝑎𝑏 =  1200, 𝑎 is an integer, and 𝑏 is an odd integer. What is the largest possible value of 𝑏?
Therefore, the largest possible value of 𝑏 is 75.
Figure 1: Comparison of LLM’s response generated by four different methods on a randomly selected problem from the MATH
dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021). (a) MetaMath considers factorization, but the problem-solving plan is wrong and ignores other
odd factors. (b) Chain-of-thought prompting (CoT) generates a valid plan, but hallucinations occur during the solution process,
leading to a trivial calculation error: if a equals 1 and k is 599.5, then b is 1200, which is not an odd integer. (c) The LLM
fine-tuned by our Enriched Instruction Tuning (EIT) first generates a high-level plan (blue parts) decomposing the original
question into a sequence of lower-level objectives and then produces a fine-grained reasoning trajectory (purple parts)with the
guidance from human-provided initial answers .
Table 1). For example, Phi-GSM and Orca-Math
generate more reliable training data via the ensem-
ble of multiple LLMs. MetaMath and MathGenie
adopt several elaborate augmentation strategies, in-
cluding question rephrasing, backward reasoning,
and self-verification, to augment mathematical rea-
soning data for fine-tuning. Additionally, some
methods use enormous amounts of data (e.g., 12M
for Phi-GSM) or external tools, e.g., code verifi-
cation (Wang et al., 2023a) and tree search (Xie
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Brandfonbrener
et al., 2024), to correct calculation and reasoning
errors. However, such a mixture of many augmen-
tation strategies slows down the run time of these
methods and makes causal attributions of perfor-
mance gains difficult. It even impairs the most
attractive property of LLMs (i.e., “scaling law”),
as demonstrated in the MetaMath (Yu et al., 2023)
and our experiments: more augmented data may
hurt performance.
Another line of research studies prompting-
based methods, such as CoT (Wei et al., 2022),
ToT (Yao et al., 2024), ReAct (Yao et al., 2022),
and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2024). They try to
induce the potential reasoning capacities of LLMs
with only in-context learning. While these methods
are conceptually simple and training-free, they of-
ten suffer from factual hallucination and error prop-
agation over a long-horizon reasoning trajectory,
as demonstrated by Fig. 1 (b). Therefore, in this
paper, we ask: Can LLMs learn to execute system-2
mathematical reasoning on top of the established
training paradigm (i.e., next-token prediction)?
A plausible solution to this problem is learn-
ing from human feedback (LHF), which collects a
very large-scale dataset of high-quality and multi-
step reasoning trajectories from human feedback
and then fine-tunes a pre-trained LLM on it via su-
pervised or reinforcement learning (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Joshi et al., 2023). Unfortunately, collect-
ing such a dataset is prohibitively expensive and
impractical due to (1) the lack of well-trained pro-
fessional human annotators for complex mathemat-
ical problems (Wang et al., 2020) and (2) the bi-
ased assessment of annotation’s correctness (Huang
et al., 2023). Instead of learning from expensive
human feedback, an alternative solution is to learn
from AI feedback (LAIF) (Lee et al., 2023), which
leverages powerful off-the-shelf LLMs, e.g., Chat-
GPT (Achiam et al., 2023), to automatically pro-
duce complete reasoning trajectories and evaluate
their quality. Despite promising and scalable, LAIF
reintroduces a chicken-and-egg dilemma similar
to what this method is trying to address from the
beginning: LLMs are not good at system-2 math-
ematical reasoning, but they are expected to learn
such capabilities from their own (potentially low-
quality) reasoning trajectories.
To better answer the above question, we
combine the strengths of LHF and LAIF in a novel
way that avoids their limitations. Concretely, we
leverage the synergy of human and AI feedback to
2
produce enriched instruction datasets consisting of
fine-grained reasoning trajectories. These datasets
are then used to fine-tune open-source LLMs. Such
human-AI collaboration achieves a win-win result:
high-quality human reasoning trajectories mitigate
LLMs’ hallucination issue while the almost
infinite generative power of LLMs reduces the
workload of human annotators. As illustrated in
Fig 2, given an instruction-response pair from any
existing human-annotated mathematical dataset,
our method EIT (standing for Enriched Instruction
Tuning) first prompts an LLM to generate a
plan decomposing the complex instruction into
a sequence of lower-level objectives. With the
guidance of the high-level plan, the same LLM
is then used to complement reasoning contexts
between or within steps omitted in the original
response through ERS prompting, leading to a
smoother reasoning trajectory for LLM fine-tuning.
We evaluate EIT and compare it with finetuning-
based, prompting-based, and tool-augmented meth-
ods on two widely used mathematical benchmarks,
MATH and GSM8K. Specifically, EIT achieves an
accuracy of 32.5% on the MATH dataset and 84.1%
on GSM8K, marking an improvement of 2.7% on
MATH over MetaMath (Yu et al., 2023). Notably,
EIT matches the performance of methods using
external tools on the GSM8K benchmark, even out-
performing MathCoder (Wang et al., 2023a). We
also demonstrated that more fine-grained reasoning
trajectories lead to better testing performance,
shedding a novel insight that the completeness and
quantity of data are equally important.
2 Related Work
Mathematical reasoning is a critical aspect of hu-
man intelligence and a significant challenge for
LLMs, which struggle with complex computa-
tions and symbolic manipulations (Lu et al., 2022).
Prompt-based methods, such as Chain-of-thought
prompting (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al.,
2024), aim to improve reasoning by generating
intermediate natural language reasoning trajecto-
ries. Howev