Abstract
Soft attention in Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) is sus-
ceptible to incorporating irrelevant information from the context into its
latent representations, which adversely affects next token generations. To
help rectify these issues, we introduce System 2 Attention (S2A), which
leverages the ability of LLMs to reason in natural language and follow in-
structions in order to decide what to attend to. S2A regenerates the input
context to only include the relevant portions, before attending to the re-
generated context to elicit the final response. In experiments, S2A outper-
forms standard attention-based LLMs on three tasks containing opinion or
irrelevant information: QA, math word problems and longform generation,
where S2A increases factuality and objectivity, and decreases sycophancy.
1 Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are highly capable, yet they are still susceptible to making
simple mistakes, which seem to display weak reasoning abilities. For example, they can be
swayed to make erroneous judgments by irrelevant context (Jia & Liang, 2017; Cho et al.,
2023; Shi et al., 2023), or by preference or opinion inherent in the input prompt, in the
latter case exhibiting an issue termed sycophancy whereby the model agrees with the input
(Sharma et al., 2023).
While several approaches try to mitigate these issues through adding more supervised train-
ing data (Wei et al., 2023) or reinforcement learning strategies (Sharma et al., 2023) we posit
that the underlying problem is inherent in the way the transformer itself is built, and in
particular its attention mechanism. That is, soft attention tends to assign probability to a
large portion of the context, including irrelevant portions, tends to overly focus on repeated
tokens partly due to the way it is trained (Holtzman et al., 2019; Welleck et al., 2019), and
partly due to the position encoding mechanism is also inclined to treat the context as a
bag-of-words when it should not (Sinha et al., 2021; 2020).
In this work, we thus investigate a radically different approach to attention mechanisms:
performing attention by using the LLM as a natural language reasoner. Specifically, we
leverage the ability of LLMs to follow instructions, and prompt them to generate the con-
text that they should pay attention to, such that it contains only relevant material that will
not skew its reasoning. We refer to this procedure as System 2 Attention (S2A), because we
can consider the underlying transformer, and its attention mechanism, as automatic opera-
tions analogous to system 1 reasoning in humans (Kahneman, 2011). System 2, allocating
effortful mental activity, takes over in humans when we need to pay deliberate attention to
a task, especially in situations where System 1 is likely to make errors (Sloman, 1996). This
subsystem is hence similar to the goal of our S2A approach, as our aim is to alleviate the
aforementioned failures of transformer soft attention with extra deliberate effort from the
reasoning engine (LLM).
We describe the class of System 2 Attention mechanisms, provide further motivation, and
detail several specific implementations in Section 2. In Section 3 we show experimentally
that S2A can produce more factual and less opinionated or sycophantic generations than
standard attention-based LLMs. In particular on the modified TriviQA dataset that includes
1
arXiv:2311.11829v1  [cs.CL]  20 Nov 2023
Human:Saratoga is a city in California.
Saratoga has many parks.
In which city was San Jose’s mayor
Sam Liccardo born?
text-davinci-003:Sam Liccardo was
born in Saratoga, California.
GPT-3.5-turbo: Sam Liccardo, the
mayor of San Jose, was born in Saratoga,
California.
LLaMA-2-70B-chat:Sam Liccardo, the
mayor of San Jose, was born in Saratoga,
California.
Human: Sunnyvale is a city in California.
Sunnyvale has many parks. Sunnyvale city is
close to the mountains. Many notable people
are born in Sunnyvale.
In which city was San Jose’s mayor Sam
Liccardo born?
text-davinci-003:Sam Liccardo was born in
Sunnyvale, California.
GPT-3.5-turbo:Sam Liccardo, the mayor
of San Jose, was born in Sunnyvale.
LLaMA-2-70B-chat: Sam Liccardo,
the mayor of San Jose, was born in Sunnyvale,
California.
Figure 1: An illustrating example showing how LLM’s responses are adversely affected by
spurious correlations in the context. Irrelevant facts about Saratoga (left) or Sunnyvale
(right) change the various LLM’s answers to the question about Sam Liccardo’s birth.
distractor opinion in the question (Sharma et al., 2023), S2A increases factuality from 62.8%
to 80.3% compared to LLaMA-2-70B-chat, and on longform generation of arguments that
contain distractor input sentiment it increases objectivity by 57.4%, and remains largely
unaffected by the inserted opinions. Finally, on math word problems from GSM-IC (Shi
et al., 2023) with in-topic irrelevant sentences, S2A improves accuracy from 51.7% to 61.3%.
2 System 2 Attention
2.1 Motivation
Large Language Models obtain excellent reasoning capabilities and a vast quantity of knowl-
edge through their pre-training process. Their next-word prediction objective requires them
to pay close attention to the current context. For example, if a certain entity is mentioned
in a context, it is likely that the same entity will appear again later in the same context.
Transformer-based LLMs are capable of learning such statistical correlations as the soft-
attention mechanism allows them to find similar words and concepts within their context.
While this may improve the next word prediction accuracy, it also makes LLMs susceptible
to be adversely affected by spurious correlations in their context. For example, it is known
that the probability of a repeated phrase increases with each repetition, creating a posi-
tive feedback loop (Holtzman et al., 2019). Generalizing this issue to so-called non-trivial
repetition (Roller et al., 2020), models tend to repeat related topics in the context as well,
not just specific tokens, because the latent representation is likely predictive of more tokens
from that same topic space. When the context contains opinion that the model copies this
is termed sycophancy (Perez et al., 2022), but in general we argue this issue is related to
any kind of context as discussed above, not just the issue of agreement with opinions.
An example of spurious correlation is shown in Figure 1. Even the most powerful LLMs
change their answer to a simple factual question when the context contains irrelevant sen-
tences, which inadvertently upweight the token probability of incorrect answers by virtue
of those tokens appearing in the context. The added context in the example seems at first
glance correlated to the question as both are about a city and a birthplace. But with deeper
understanding, it is clear that the added text is irrelevant, and thus should be ignored.
This motivates the need for a more deliberate attention mechanism that relies on deeper
understanding. To distinguish it from the more low-level attention-mechanism, we call it
System 2 Attention (S2A). In this paper, we explore one way of building such an attention
2
mechanism using the LLMs themselves. In particular, we employ instruction-tuned LLMs
to rewrite the context by removing irrelevant text. In this way, LLMs can make deliberate
reasoning decisions about which parts of the input to focus on before outputting a response.
Another advantage of using instruction-tuned LLMs is that it becomes possible to control
the attention focus, perhaps similar to how humans can control their attention.
2.2 Implementation
We consider the typical scenario in which a Large Language Model (LLM) is given a context,
denoted as x, and its objective is to generate a high-quality sequence, denoted as y. This
procedure is represented as y∼LLM(x).
System 2 Attention (S2A) is a simple two-step process:
1. Given the context x, S2A first regenerates the context x′ such that irrelevant parts
of the context that will adversely affect the output are removed. We denote this
x′∼S2A(x).