Abstract. In this paper, we introduce an innovative approach for addressing Bayesian
inverse problems through the utilization of physics-informed invertible neural networks
(PI-INN). The PI-INN framework encompasses two sub-networks: an invertible neural
network (INN) and a neural basis network (NB-Net). The primary role of the NB-Net
lies in modeling the spatial basis functions characterizing the solution to the forward
problem dictated by the underlying partial di fferential equation. Simultaneously, the
INN is designed to partition the parameter vector linked to the input physical field into
two distinct components: the expansion coe fficients representing the forward problem
solution and the Gaussian latent noise. If the forward mapping is precisely estimated,
and the statistical independence between expansion coe fficients and latent noise is well-
maintained, the PI-INN offers a precise and efficient generative model for Bayesian inverse
problems, yielding tractable posterior density estimates. As a particular physics-informed
deep learning model, the primary training challenge for PI-INN centers on enforcing the
independence constraint, which we tackle by introducing a novel independence loss based
on estimated density. We support the e fficacy and precision of the proposed PI-INN
through a series of numerical experiments, including inverse kinematics, 1-dimensional
and 2-dimensional di ffusion equations, and seismic traveltime tomography. Specifically,
our experimental results showcase the superior performance of the proposed independence
loss in comparison to the commonly used but computationally demanding kernel-based
maximum mean discrepancy loss.
Keywords: Bayesian inverse problems, Physics-informed deep learning, Invertible neural
networks, Uncertainty quantification
arXiv:2304.12541v3  [math.NA]  3 Oct 2023
PI-INN 2
1. Introduction
Inverse problems arise in various scientific and engineering fields, such as seismic
tomography [1], material inspection [2], and medical imaging [3], etc. These problems aim
to infer the input parameters of a system, such as physical fields, source locations, initial
and boundary conditions, from the corresponding measurement data. Inverse problems
are typically ill-posed and difficult to solve because the measurement data originates from
indirect and sparse observations. It is of great practical value and theoretical significance
to develop an e fficient computation model for accurate and stable solutions, which has
drawn much attention from scientists and engineers.
Classical approaches to inverse problems encompass regularization methods and
Bayesian inference. Regularization techniques aim to determine point estimates by
simultaneously minimizing the misfits between observed and predicted outputs while
penalizing undesired parameter features through a regularization term [4, 5]. Bayesian
inference incorporates uncertainties in prior information and observations through
Bayesian rules. It constructs the posterior distribution of parameters, thus e ffectively
quantifying the uncertainty of unknown inputs. However, in many applications, it is
computationally expensive to sample from the intractable Bayesian posterior distributions
by using statistical simulation techniques, e.g., Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [6–9],
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [10, 11], and Sequential Monte Carlo [12, 13]. To address this
issue, many researchers utilized various variational inference algorithms to improve
computational e fficiency, including mean-field variational inference [14, 15], automatic
differential variational inference [16, 17], and Stein variational gradient descent [16, 18].
But the variational methods may face challenges in high-dimensional settings due to the
difficulty of accurately approximating posterior distributions with the tractable surrogate
distribution. Although all aforementioned methods have shown to be relatively e fficient,
they still require numerous evaluations of the forward model and the complicated
parametric derivatives, which introduce higher computational cost in high-dimensional
situations. Consequently, deep learning-based methods o ffer an e fficient alternative,
where they are capable of providing real-time inversions for certain classes of inverse
problems with new measurement data of similar type.
Deep learning methods have emerged as a promising approach for solving inverse
problems, such as medical imaging [19, 20] and electromagnetic inversion [21, 22].
Nevertheless, these methods heavily rely on labeled data from solutions of the forward
problem, rendering them inappropriate for inverse problems where such information
is not present. With the continuous advancement of physics-informed neural network
(PINN) technology in recent years, which leverages physical equations instead of labeled
data to solve partial di fferential equations (PDEs) [23], extensive related research has
demonstrated that PINN can e fficiently recover unknown parameters as well [24–32].
Furthermore, models based on invertible neural networks (INN) [33–35] have exhibited
potential in Bayesian inference. This is attributed to their e fficiency and accuracy
PI-INN 3
advantages in both sampling and density estimation of complex target distributions
through bijective transformations, as evidenced in the works of [36–43]. Nonetheless,
certain limitations persist within the current research. For instance, INN models in [36–39]
demand substantial quantities of labeled data for pretraining, which is often unavailable
in many practical inverse problems. The invertible DeepONet introduced in [41] alleviates
the need for labeled data, but it entails an additional variational inference procedure to
approximate the true posterior distribution.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to address the issues of Bayesian inverse
problems, namely physics-informed invertible neural networks (PI-INN). In PI-INN, a
neural Basis Network (NB-Net) identifies spatial basis functions for the solution to the
forward problem governed by the given PDE, while an INN bijectively transforms the
input physical field’s parameter vector into a combination of expansion coe fficients for
the forward problem solution and Gaussian latent variables. To achieve an e ffective
approximation of the true posterior, PI-INN undergoes training to accurately predict the
solution of the equation while ensuring statistical independence between the expansion
coefficients and Gaussian latent variables. Notably, we introduce a new independence
loss term that can be naturally incorporated with residual based physics-informed loss
terms, and theoretically prove that the PI-INN can e fficiently generate samples from the
true posterior distribution of unknown parameters at the limit case where all loss terms
approaches zero. The proposed PI-INN approach admits the following main advantages:
• PI-INN can provide a tractable estimation of the posterior distribution, which enables
efficient sampling and high-accuracy density evaluation without requiring additional
variational inference procedures [41].
• The innovative independence loss term leverages the INN’s density estimation
capabilities, obviating the requirement for labeled data. In contrast, the kernel-based
MMD loss term employed in [36, 37] is applicable exclusively to labeled data and
easily suffers from the curse of dimensionality.
• PI-INN establishes an integrated learning framework for Bayesian inverse problems,
with the capability to merge physics-informed learning and data-driven learning.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the problem
statement of Bayesian inverse problems. In Section 3, the framework of our physics-
informed invertible neural networks (PI-INN) is introduced, where the algorithm of
training and inversion approaches with PI-INN for the physical system is described
in detail. In section 4, we first present the advantage of the new loss term and then
demonstrate the performance of PI-INN for solving Bayesian inverse problems through
several numerical examples. Finally, some concluding remarks are given in Section 5.
PI-INN 4