Abstract
Modern LLMs are trained to “think” primarily via explicit text generation, such as chain-of-thought
(CoT), which defers reasoning to post-training and under-leverages pre-training data. We present
andopen-sourceOuro, named after the recursive Ouroboros, a family of pre-trained Looped
Language Models (LoopLM) that instead build reasoning into the pre-training phase through
(i) iterative computation in latent space, (ii) an entropy-regularized objective for learned depth
allocation, and (iii) scaling to7.7Ttokens. Ouro 1.4B and 2.6B models enjoy superior performance
that match the results of up to 12B SOTA LLMs across a wide range of benchmarks. Through
controlled experiments, we show this advantage stems not from increased knowledge capacity, but
from superior knowledge manipulation capabilities. We also show that LoopLM yields reasoning
traces more aligned with final outputs than explicit CoT. We hope our results show the potential of
LoopLM as a novel scaling direction in the reasoning era.
Correspondence:ridger@ucsc.edu,zhangge.eli@bytedance.com,huang.wenhao@bytedance.com,jsn@ucsc.edu
Project Page & Base / Reasoning Models:http://ouro-llm.github.io
ARC-C BBH
MMLU-Pro
MMLU
MBPP+GSM8K
Wino-
grande
Hellaswag
ARC-C BBH
MMLU-Pro
MMLU
HumanEval+
MBPP+
MATH500
GSM8K
Wino-
grande
Hellaswag
Ouro 1.4B
HumanEval+MATH500
Gemma3 1B Qwen3 1.7B Gemma3 4B Qwen3 4B
Ouro 2.6B
Gemma3 4B Qwen3 4B Gemma3 12B Qwen3 8B
Layer N
Layer 2
Layer 1
Input 
Embedding
Exit Gate
𝒑𝒊
Head
𝓛𝒊
× R
Current Loop = 𝒊 
Figure 1Ouro Looped Language Model performance. (Left) The parameter-shared looped architecture. (Middle &
Right) Radar plots comparing the Ouro 1.4B and 2.6B models, both with 4 recurrent steps (red), against individual
transformer baselines. Our models demonstrate strong performance comparable to or exceeding much larger baselines.
1
arXiv:2510.25741v4  [cs.CL]  17 Nov 2025
1 Introduction
The advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) has historically relied on scaling up model size as
the primary driver, accompanied by increases in data and compute [1–4]. However, deploying models with
hundreds of billions of parameters requires extensive infrastructure, increasing latency and cost while limiting
accessibility. These factors makeparameter efficiencycritical: achieving better model capability within a
fixed parameter budget. Such models not only mitigate overfitting on finite datasets with fewer trainable
parameters, but also enable more practical deployment with lighter infrastructure. To achieve such parameter
efficiency, two main avenues have been explored. The first expands the training corpus regardless of model
size [5], though data scarcity increasingly limits this path. The second leverages inference-time compute
through Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning [6], allowing models to spend more compute on complex problems
via extended token generation.
We explore a third pathway based on architectural innovation: achieving dynamic computation within a
fixed parameter budget.This is accomplished by recursively applying shared parameters, where a group of
weight-tied layers are iteratively reused during the forward pass. We call this the Looped Language Model
(LoopLM). The design yields several advantages. First, LoopLM enables adaptive computation via a learned
early-exit mechanism: simple inputs can terminate after fewer recurrent steps, while complex ones allocate
more iterations. This decouples the compute depth from parameter count. Second, unlike inference-time
methods such as CoT, LoopLM scales by deepening its internal computational graph rather than extending
the output sequence, avoiding context-length bloat. Finally, LoopLM can improve capacity per parameter
and outperform standard transformers of larger sizes when trained on the same data.
An extensive range of prior studies have explored LoopLM at modest scales [7–14], from the seminal Universal
Transformer [15] to recursive Transformers [16] and latent reasoning approaches [17–19]. Yet whether Looped
Language Models translate into frontier-level gains at practically meaningful scales is unproven. To this end,
we ask:
Does LoopLM exhibit more favorable scaling behavior (in capabilities, efficiency and safety),
compared to non-recursive transformer models?
We show the answer is yes. We characterize LoopLM’s scaling trajectory and saturation behavior, demon-
strating that LoopLM offers a more efficient path to higher performance. These claims are evaluated under
multi-trillion-token training regimes typical of SoTA foundation models, extending well beyond prior work.
Beyond the empirical gains, we analyze the mechanisms behind these improvements by asking the following
questions:
1. Does the recursive reuse of weights yield the capability gains typically obtained by increasing depth
with unshared weights?