Abstract
Biomedical datasets are often modeled as knowl-
edge graphs (KGs) because they capture the
multi-relational, heterogeneous, and dynamic na-
tures of biomedical systems. KG completion
(KGC), can, therefore, help researchers make
predictions to inform tasks like drug reposition-
ing. While previous approaches for KGC were
either rule-based or embedding-based, hybrid ap-
proaches based on neurosymbolic artiﬁcial in-
telligence are becoming more popular. Many
of these methods possess unique characteris-
tics which make them even better suited toward
biomedical challenges. Here, we survey such ap-
proaches with an emphasis on their utilities and
prospective beneﬁts for biomedicine.
1. Introduction
Often, biomedical concepts can be understood as part of a
system comprising highly multi-relational, heterogeneou s,
and interconnected entities. For instance, molecular in-
teractions are observed to engage in dynamic, condition-
dependent networks (
Chang & Karin , 2001). Graph struc-
tures are a popular choice for representing biomedical sys-
tems as they facilitate the storage of such data (
Li et al. ,
2022).
Recently, several artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) approaches for analyzing biomedical data
(
Esteva et al., 2017; Savoy, 2020) and assisting clinical
treatment planning ( Wang et al., 2019) have been reported.
Hence, we anticipate that AI will become an integral part of
modern healthcare processes. As this becomes more of a re-
ality, considering the ethical and practical beneﬁts of model
1Artiﬁcial Intelligence and its Applications Institute,
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edin-
burgh, UK. Correspondence to: Lauren Nicole DeLong
<L.N.DELONG@sms.ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning: W orkshop on Knowledge and Logical Reasoning in
the Era of Data-driven Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR
202, 2023. Copyright 2023 by the author(s).
interpretability, the inherent ability to understand how a nd
why predictions were made, could signiﬁcantly improve
the resultant quality of care. However, facilitating model in-
terpretability is a challenge as state-of-the-art methods tend
to lack it (
Chakraborty et al., 2017). Furthermore, while
patterned domain knowledge between general concepts in
biology is ample (
Ashburner et al., 2000; Guvench, 2016),
few data-driven ML approaches explicitly encode the high-
level relationships from those knowledge bases.
Recently, however, neurosymbolic methods have managed
to leverage the beneﬁts of both rule-based inference and
deep learning. These methods possess unique charac-
teristics which are suited to address the aforementioned
challenges. To facilitate a better understanding of these
characteristics, we survey several of such approaches that
were used on biomedical graphs. In our previous sur-
vey (
DeLong et al., 2023), we outlined three major taxo-
nomic categories for neurosymbolic reasoning on graph
structures:
1. logically-informed embedding approaches,