Abstract
Knowledge Graphs are increasingly becom-
ing popular for a variety of downstream tasks
like Question Answering and Information Re-
trieval. However, the Knowledge Graphs are
often incomplete, thus leading to poor perfor-
mance. As a result, there has been a lot of inter-
est in the task of Knowledge Base Completion.
More recently, Graph Neural Networks have
been used to capture structural information in-
herently stored in these Knowledge Graphs
and have been shown to achieve SOTA perfor-
mance across a variety of datasets. In this sur-
vey, we understand the various strengths and
weaknesses of the proposed methodology and
try to ﬁnd new exciting research problems in
this area that require further investigation.
1 Introduction
Knowledge Bases are collection of factual infor-
mation in the form of relational triplets. Each rela-
tional triplets can be represented as (e1,r,e2) where
e1 ande2 are entities in knowledge base and r is the
relation betweene1 ande2. The most popular way
of visualising knowledge base is by representing
them as multi relational graph where each triplet
(e1,r,e2) is represented as directed edge from e1
to e2 with label r. Knowledge Bases have used
to improve performance across variety of tasks
like Question Answering (Sorokin and Gurevych
(2018), Cui et al. (2017)), Dialogue Generation
(Liu et al. (2018)) and many others.
However, since Knowledge Bases are populated
from automatic mining from texts, they are often
incomplete since it is not possible to manually write
all the facts, and there are often inaccuracies in
extraction. This inaccuracy leads to a decline in
performance across a variety of downstream tasks.
Hence, there has been a lot of work in coming up
with an efﬁcient tool to complete the Knowledge
Bases (KBs) by automatically adding new facts
without requiring extra knowledge. This task is
referred to as Knowledge Base Completion (or Link
Prediction), where the goal is to solve queries like
(e1,r,?).
The ﬁrst approach towards efﬁcient Knowledge
Base Completion were additive models like TransE
(Bordes et al. (2013)) and TransH (Wang et al.
(2014)) where relations were interpreted as sim-
ple translations over hidden entity representations.
Multiplicative models like Distmult (Yang et al.
(2015)) and Complex (Trouillon et al. (2016)) were
then observed to outperform these simple additive
models. Instead of translation, RotatE (Sun et al.
(2019a)) deﬁnes relation as simple rotations such
that the head entity can be rotated in the complex
embedding space to match the tail entity, which
has been shown to satisfy a lot of useful seman-
tic properties like compositionality of relations.
Recently, more expressive Neural Network-based
methods ( like ConvE (Dettmers et al. (2018)) and
ConvKB(Nguyen et al. (2018))) were introduced
where the scoring function is learned along with
the model. However, all these models process each
triplet independently. As a result, these methods
cannot capture semantically rich neighborhood and
hence produce low-quality embeddings.
Graphs have been widely used to visualize real-
world data. There has been tremendous progress
in applying ML techniques over images and text,
some of which are being successfully adapted to
graphs (like Kipf and Welling (2017), Hamilton
et al. (2017), Velickovic et al. (2018). Taking inspi-
ration from this approach, a number of Graph Neu-
ral Network-based methods have been proposed
to capture neighborhood in Knowledge Graphs for
the KBC task. In this survey, we aim to look into
some of these formulations.
2 Dataset
The approaches for Knowledge Graph Completion
have been evaluated on a variety of benchmarks
datasets. Now, we will study in brief details about
arXiv:2007.12374v1  [cs.CL]  24 Jul 2020
Table 1: Summary of the datasets used in KBC experiments
Dataset Entities Relations Train Valid Test
FB15k-237 14,541 237 272,115 17,535 20,466
FB15k 14,951 1,345 483,142 50,000 59,071
WN18 40,943 18 141,442 5,000 5,000
WN18RR 40,943 11 86,835 3,034 3,134
each of these large KGs used to assess performance
in KBC tasks. Table 1 shows a description of the
sizes of these benchmark datasets.
• FB15k - FB15k is a subset of relational
database Freebase and is a popular bench-
mark for Knowledge Graph Completion. In
Toutanova and Chen (2015), a serious issue
was observed with this dataset. The dataset
consist of inverse triplet like (e1,r−1,e 2) in
test set such that (e2,r,e 1) exists in the train-
ing set. Thus a simple model that can memo-
rize the triplets in the training set can achieve
very high test accuracy in this dataset. As a re-
sult, they proposed a new dataset Fb15k-237,
where they had removed such inverse triplets.
• WN18 - WN18 is a subset of WordNet KB
containing lexical relation between words.
Similar to FB15K, it contained inverse rela-
tions, and hence WN18RR was introduced.
WN18RR has a hierarchical structure, and as
a result, it poses a signiﬁcant challenge to all
KBC approaches that do not handle transitive
relations.
Knowledge Graph Completion methods are evalu-
ated using test queries (e1,r,?), where we create a
ranking list of all entities using the method’s scor-
ing function. We then compute metrics like Mean
Reciprocal Rank that measures the average of the
reciprocal rank of correct resulte2 for a given query,
and Hits@N where measures number of timese2
occurs in top N of the ranked list.
3 Basic Concepts
In this section, we will talk about some of the basic
concepts related to Graph Neural Networks.
3.1 Message Passing Neural Network
Message Passing Network (Gilmer et al. (2017))
is a framework that aims to generalize the various
neural network proposed for graph-based data. Let
us look at graph G with node embeddings nv for
all nodes v, edge embeddings evw for all edges
between v and w. We ﬁrst deﬁne message function
as given below-
M(nv,nw,evw) =f(nv,nv,evw)
where f is nonlinear function and is usually taken
as MLP. Then the net message sent to node v is
computed by aggregating the message from all its
neighbours w using the equation below-
mt+1v =AGGwϵN (v)(M(ntv,ntw,etvw))
where N(v) is neighbour set of v, t is timestep when
messages are being aggregated and AGG is aggre-
gation function that can be sum, mean or any other
function. Finally, the embedding for node v are
updated using the update function UPD as given
below-
nt+1v =UPD (mt+1v,ntv)
3.2 Graph Convolution Network
Graph Convolution Network is based on spectral
graph convolution networks. Here the dataset con-
sists of a graph with vertex set, adjacency matrix,
and feature set for each node. These features could
be categorical attributes like node labels, structural
features like node degrees as well as the simple
one-hot encoding for each node. GCNs aggregate
information from neighbors of a node by using the
simple equation given below.
hvk =σ(Wk(ΣuϵN (v) ⋃u
hk−1
u√
∥N(u)∥∥N(v)∥
))
3.3 Graph Attention Network
In GCNs, all the neighbors contribute equally to
the aggregation for each target node. Graph Atten-
tion Networks (GATs) [Velickovic et al. (2018)]
overcome the shortcomings of the previous works
by learning to assign varying levels of importance
Figure 1: Graph Attention Network methodology being
shown over sample graph. Image from Velickovic et al.
(2018)
to all the nodes in the neighborhood of the node
under consideration, rather than treating each node
as equally important or using a ﬁxed weight. More-
over, GATs are generalizable to unseen nodes (in-
ductive learning), thus simulating a real-world set-
ting and have been shown to advance state of the
art across a variety of tasks.
The input to GAT layer is a set of node features,
xxx ={⃗ x1, ⃗ x2,··· , ⃗ xN}, where N is the number
of nodes. Then attention weight for each edge is
calculated using the equation given below.
eij =a(WWW⃗ xi,WWW⃗ xj) (1)
where W is weight matrix, a is any attention
function, and eij is attention weight for the edge
between node i and node j. For each node i, the
weights are then normalized by passing through
softmax function. The output embedding for each
node is then computed by the equation given below
⃗x′
i =σ(
∑
j∈Ni
αijWWW⃗ xj) (2)
3.4 Decoder
A lot of approaches that utilises GNN for KBC
tasks uses them as auto encoder to help provide
information of neighbouring relation triplets. Then,
pre-existing scoring function like DistMult is en-
riched with this information in the form of initial-
isation of it’s entity embeddings and outperforms
the method that uses only scoring function. This
scoring function is referred to as decoder in litera-
ture.
4 GCN Encoder for Knowledge Graph
Completion
R-GCN (Schlichtkrull et al. (2018)) was one of
the earliest approaches to use GNNs for this task.
They introduce a relational Graph Convolution Net-
work, which produces locality-sensitive embed-
dings, which are then passed to the decoder that
predicts missing links in KG. It is important to note
that simple GCN cannot be used to embed KGs
because it ignores the edge labels in the graph. As
a result, the R-GCN slightly modiﬁed the scoring
function of simple GCN to capture the relationship
between the edges.
hvk+1 =σ(ΣrϵRΣjϵNv r
1
cr
Wrkhjk +W0khvk)
Here R is a set of relations, and Nvr denote the
set of entities that connected to v by relation r.
We can see the model learns a new weight ma-
trix for each relation, thus making their approach
nonscalable for large graphs. They try to resolve
this issue by coming with a basis and block diag-
onal decomposition. In the basis decomposition,
each relation’s weight matrix is represented as a
sum of some base matrices. In the block diago-
nal decomposition, each relation weight matrix is
represented as a direct sum over block-diagonal
matrices. These approaches not only help to solve
overﬁtting but also make relation weight matrices
dependent on each other, thus helping to transfer
knowledge learned from frequently occurring re-
lation to learning weight matrices for rare relation
better. They evaluate their approaches with state of
the art multiplicative models like ComplEx and per-
form worse for FB15K and WN18 datasets. They
then combine the R-GCN scores with DistMult
scores and achieve comparable results to existing
SOTA. The paper’s main contribution is to show
that GNNs can be successfully applied to KGs.
However, they do not look into differential weigh-
ing of the node’s neighborhood as well as require
decoder since they do not learn relation embedding
through GNN framework
5 Relation Weighted GCN Encoder
SACN (Shang et al. (2019)) try to extend on pre-
vious work by aggregating information from the
node’s neighborhood by being sensitive to edge re-
lation types. This is referred to as Weighted Graph
Convolution Network (WGCN). In WGCN, the
whole graph is broken into subgraphs such that
each subgraph contains edges of only one relation
type. Then GCN is applied on each subgraph using
the equation given below for relation t.
hvk+1 =σ(ΣjϵNvαtkg(hvk,hjk))
Model Uniform Aggregation
of Neighbours
Relation
Embedding
Use
Decoder
Incorporate
prior rules
Provide
Explanation
Use
Attribute
R-GCN
Schlichtkrull et al. (2018) Yes No Yes No No No
TransGCN
Cai et al. (2019) Yes Yes No No No No
KB-GAT
Nathani et al. (2019)
No
(attention) Yes Yes No No No
SACN
Shang et al. (2019)
No
(relation weighted) Yes Yes No No Yes
ExpressGNN
Zhang et al. (2020) Yes Yes No Yes No No
DPMPN Xu et al. (2020) Yes Yes No No Yes No
Table 2: Summary of techniques used for Knowledge Graph Completion using GNNs using CNNs
Here hvk+1 is embedding for node v at layer
k + 1,Nv speciﬁes the neighborhood of node v for
relation type t andhvk are node embedding at layer
k. g is simple matrix multiplication with connec-
tion coefﬁcient matrix W which is shared across
all relations which is in contrast to R-GCN which
have separate weights for each relation. It then
aggregates information across all these single re-
lation subgraphs by weighing them with learnable
parameterαt, which is different for each relation
ty