Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel recurrent neu-
ral network (RNN) architecture. The proposed
RNN, gated-feedback RNN (GF-RNN), extends
the existing approach of stacking multiple recur-
rent layers by allowing and controlling signals
ﬂowing from upper recurrent layers to lower lay-
ers using a global gating unit for each pair of
layers. The recurrent signals exchanged between
layers are gated adaptively based on the previous
hidden states and the current input. We evalu-
ated the proposed GF-RNN with different types
of recurrent units, such as tanh, long short-term
memory and gated recurrent units, on the tasks
of character-level language modeling and Python
program evaluation. Our empirical evaluation of
different RNN units, revealed that in both tasks,
the GF-RNN outperforms the conventional ap-
proaches to build deep stacked RNNs. We sug-
gest that the improvement arises because the GF-
RNN can adaptively assign different layers to dif-
ferent timescales and layer-to-layer interactions
(including the top-down ones which are not usu-
ally present in a stacked RNN) by learning to gate
these interactions.
1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been widely stud-
ied and used for various machine learning tasks which in-
volve sequence modeling, especially when the input and
output have variable lengths. Recent studies have revealed
that RNNs using gating units can achieve promising re-
sults in both classiﬁcation and generation tasks (see, e.g.,
Graves, 2013; Bahdanau et al., 2014; Sutskever et al.,
2014).
Although RNNs can theoretically capture any long-term
dependency in an input sequence, it is well-known to be
difﬁcult to train an RNN to actually do so (Hochreiter,
1991; Bengio et al., 1994; Hochreiter, 1998). One of the
most successful and promising approaches to solve this is-
sue is by modifying the RNN architecture e.g., by using a
gated activation function, instead of the usual state-to-state
transition function composing an afﬁne transformation and
a point-wise nonlinearity. A gated activation function,
such as the long short-term memory (LSTM, Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) and the gated recurrent unit (GRU,
Cho et al., 2014), is designed to have more persistent mem-
ory so that it can capture long-term dependencies more eas-
ily.
Sequences modeled by an RNN can contain both fast
changing and slow changing components, and these un-
derlying components are often structured in a hierarchical
manner, which, as ﬁrst pointed out by El Hihi & Bengio
(1995) can help to extend the ability of the RNN to learn
to model longer-term dependencies. A conventional way to
encode this hierarchy in an RNN has been to stack multi-
ple levels of recurrent layers (Schmidhuber, 1992; El Hihi
& Bengio, 1995; Graves, 2013; Hermans & Schrauwen,
2013). More recently, Koutn ´ık et al. (2014) proposed a
more explicit approach to partition the hidden units in an
RNN into groups such that each group receives the sig-
nal from the input and the other groups at a separate, pre-
deﬁned rate, which allows feedback information between
these partitions to be propagated at multiple timescales.
Stollenga et al. (2014) recently showed the importance of
feedback information across multiple levels of feature hier-
archy, however, with feedforward neural networks.
In this paper, we propose a novel design for RNNs, called a
gated-feedback RNN (GF-RNN), to deal with the issue of
learning multiple adaptive timescales. The proposed RNN
has multiple levels of recurrent layers like stacked RNNs
do. However, it uses gated-feedback connections from up-
per recurrent layers to the lower ones. This makes the hid-
den states across a pair of consecutive timesteps fully con-
nected. To encourage each recurrent layer to work at differ-
ent timescales, the proposed GF-RNN controls the strength
of the temporal (recurrent) connection adaptively. This ef-
arXiv:1502.02367v4  [cs.NE]  17 Jun 2015
Gated Feedback Recurrent Neural Networks
fectively lets the model to adapt its structure based on the
input sequence.
We empirically evaluated the proposed model against the
conventional stacked RNN and the usual, single-layer RNN
on the task of language modeling and Python program eval-
uation (Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014). Our experiments re-
veal that the proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the
conventional approaches on two different datasets.