Abstract
The Generative Flow Network (Bengio et al., 2021b, GFlowNet) is a probabilistic framework where an agent
learns a stochastic policy for object generation, such that the probability of generating an object is proportional
to a given reward function. Its effectiveness has been shown in discovering high-quality and diverse solutions,
compared to reward-maximizing reinforcement learning-based methods. Nonetheless, GFlowNets only learn
from rewards of the terminal states, which can limit its applicability. Indeed, intermediate rewards play
a critical role in learning, for example from intrinsic motivation to provide intermediate feedback even in
particularly challenging sparse reward tasks. Inspired by this, we propose Generative Augmented Flow
Networks (GAFlowNets), a novel learning framework to incorporate intermediate rewards into GFlowNets.
We specify intermediate rewards by intrinsic motivation to tackle the exploration problem in sparse reward
environments. GAFlowNets can leverage edge-based and state-based intrinsic rewards in a joint way to
improve exploration. Based on extensive experiments on the GridWorld task, we demonstrate the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of GAFlowNet in terms of convergence, performance, and diversity of solutions. We further
show that GAFlowNet is scalable to a more complex and large-scale molecule generation domain, where it
achieves consistent and signiﬁcant performance improvement.
1 Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved signiﬁcant progress in recent years with particular
success in games (Mnih et al., 2015, Silver et al., 2016, Vinyals et al., 2019). RL methods applied to
the setting where a reward is only given at the end (i.e., terminal states) typically aim at maximizing
that reward function for learning the optimal policy. However, diversity of the generated states is
desirable in a wide range of practical scenarios including molecule generation (Bengio et al., 2021a),
biological sequence design (Jain et al., 2022b), recommender systems (Kunaver and Požrl, 2017),
dialogue systems (Zhang et al., 2020), etc. For example, in molecule generation, the reward function
used in in-silico simulations can be uncertain and imperfect itself (compared to the more expensive
in-vivo experiments). Therefore, it is not sufﬁcient to only search the solution that maximizes the
return. Instead, it is desired that we sample many high-reward candidates, which can be achieved
by sampling them proportionally to the reward of each terminal state.
Interestingly, GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a,b) learn a stochastic policy to sample compos-
ite objects x ∈ Xwith probability proportional to the return R(x). The learning paradigm of
GFlowNets is different from other RL methods, as it is explicitly aiming at modeling the diversity
in the target distribution, i.e., all the modes of the reward function. This makes it natural for prac-
tical applications where the model should discover objects that are both interesting and diverse,
which is a focus of previous GFlowNet works (Bengio et al., 2021a,b, Jain et al., 2022b, Malkin et al.,
2022).
∗penny.ling.pan@gmail.com
1
arXiv:2210.03308v1  [cs.LG]  7 Oct 2022
Yet, GFlowNets only learn from the reward of the terminal state, and do not consider interme-
diate rewards, which can limit its applicability, especially in more general RL settings. Rewards
play a critical role in learning (Silver et al., 2021). The tremendous success of RL largely depends
on the reward signals that provide intermediate feedback. Even in environments with sparse re-
wards, RL agents can motivate themselves for efﬁcient exploration by intrinsic motivation, which
augments the sparse extrinsic learning signal with a dense intrinsic reward at each step. Our focus
in this paper is precisely on introducing such intermediate intrinsic rewards in GFlowNets, since
they can be applied even in settings where the extrinsic reward is sparse (say non-zero only on a
few terminal states).
Inspired by this missing element of GFlowNets, we propose a new GFlowNet learning frame-
work that takes intermediate feedback signals into account to provide an exploration incentive
during training. The notion of ﬂow in GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a,b) refers to a marginalized
quantity that sums rewards over all downstream terminal states following a given state, while shar-
ing that reward with other states leading to the same terminal states. Apart from the existing ﬂows
in the network, we introduce augmented ﬂows as intermediate rewards. Our new framework is
well-suited for sparse reward tasks by considering intrinsic motivation as intermediate rewards,
where the training of GFlowNet can get trapped in a few modes, since it may be difﬁcult for it to
discover new modes based on those it visited (Bengio et al., 2021b).
We ﬁrst propose an edge-based augmented ﬂow, based on the incorporation of an intrinsic
reward at each transition. However, we ﬁnd that although it improves learning efﬁciency, it only
performs local exploration and still lacks sufﬁcient exploration ability to drive the agent to visit
solutions with zero rewards. On the other hand, we ﬁnd that incorporating intermediate rewards
in a state-based manner (Bengio et al., 2021b) can result in slower convergence and large bias em-
pirically, although it can explore more broadly. Therefore, we propose a joint way to take both
edge-based and state-based augmented ﬂows into account. Our method can improve the diversity
of solutions and learning efﬁciency by reaping the best from both worlds. Extensive experiments on
the GridWorld and molecule domains that are already used to benchmark GFlowNets corroborate
the effectiveness of our proposed framework.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel GFlowNet learning framework, dubbed Generative Augmented Flow
Networks (GAFlowNet), to incorporate intermediate rewards, which are represented by aug-
mented ﬂows in the ﬂow network.
• We specify intermediate rewards by intrinsic motivation to deal with the exploration of state
space for GFlowNets in sparse reward tasks. We theoretically prove that our augmented ob-
jective asymptotically yields an unbiased solution to the original formulation.
• We conduct extensive experiments on the GridWorld domain, demonstrating the effective-
ness of our method in terms of convergence, diversity, and performance. Our method is also
general, being applicable to different types of GFlowNets. We further extend our method to
the larger-scale and more challenging molecule generation task, where our method achieves
consistent and substantial improvements over strong baselines.
2 Background
Consider a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G = (S, A), where S denotes the state space, and A
represents the action space, which is a subset ofS×S . We denote the vertexs0∈S to be the initial
state with no incoming edges, while the vertex sf without outgoing edges is called the sink state,
2
and state-action pairs correspond to edges. The goal for GFlowNets is to learn a stochastic policy
π that can construct discrete objects x∈X with probability proportional to the reward function
R :X →R≥0, i.e.,π(x)∝ R(x). GFlowNets construct objects sequentially, where each step adds
an element to the construction. We call the resulting sequence of state transitions from the initial
state to a terminal state τ = ( s0→···→ sn) a trajectory, where τ ∈T withT denoting the set
of trajectories. Bengio et al. (2021a) deﬁne a trajectory ﬂow F :T →R≥0. Let F (s) = ∑
τ∋sF (τ)
deﬁne a state ﬂow for any state s, and F (s→ s′) = ∑
τ∋s→s′F (τ) deﬁnes the edge ﬂow for any
edge s→ s′. The trajectory ﬂow induces a probability measure P (τ) = F (τ )
Z , whereZ = ∑
τ∈T F (τ)
denotes the total ﬂow. We then deﬁne the corresponding forward policyPF (s′|s) = F (s→s′)
F (s) and the
backward policyPB(s|s′) = F (s→s′)
F (s′) . The ﬂows can be considered as the amount of water ﬂowing
through edges (like pipes) or states (like tees connecting pipes) (Malkin et al., 2022), with R(x) the
amount of water through terminal state x, and PF (s′|s) the relative amount of water ﬂowing in
edges outgoing from s.
2.1 GFlowNets training criterion
We call a ﬂow consistent if it satisﬁes the ﬂow matching constraint for all internal states s, i.e.,∑
s′′→sF (s′′ → s) = F (s) = ∑
s→s′F (s→ s′), which means that the incoming ﬂows equal the
outgoing ﬂows. Bengio et al. (2021a) prove that for a consistent ﬂow F where the terminal ﬂow is
set to be the reward, the forward policy can sample objectsx with probability proportional toR(x).
Flow matching (FM). Bengio et al. (2021a) propose to approximate the edge ﬂow by a model
Fθ(s, s′) parameterized by θ following the FM objective, i.e.,LFM(s) = (log ∑
(s′′→s)∈AFθ(s′′, s)−
log ∑
(s→s′)∈AFθ(s, s′))2 for non-terminal states. At terminal states, a similar objective encourages
the incoming ﬂow to match the corresponding reward. The objective is optimized using trajectories
sampled from a training policyπ with full support such as a tempered version of PFθ or a mixture
ofPFθ with a uniform policyU, i.e.,πθ = (1−ϵ)PFθ +ϵ·U, This is similar toϵ-greedy and entropy-
regularized strategies in RL to improve exploration. Bengio et al. (2021a) prove that if we reach
a global minimum of the expected loss function and the training policy πθ has full support, then
GFlowNet samples from the target distribution.
Detailed balance (DB). Bengio et al. (2021b) propose the DB objective to avoid the computa-
tionally expensive summing operation over the parents or children of states. For learning based
on DB, we train a neural network with a state ﬂow model Fθ, a forward policy modelPFθ(·|s), and
a backward policy model PBθ(·|s) parameterized by θ. The optimization objective is to minimize
LDB(s, s′) = (log(Fθ(s)PFθ(s′|s))− log(Fθ(s′)PBθ(s|s′)))2. It also samples from the target distribu-
tion if a global minimum of the expected loss is reached andπθ has full support.
Trajectory balance (TB). Malkin et al. (2022) propose the TB objective for faster credit
assignment and learning over longer trajectories. The loss function for TB is LTB(τ) =
(log(Zθ
∏n−1
t=0 PFθ(st+1|st))− log(R(x) ∏n−1
t=0 PB(st|st+1)))2, whereZθ is a learnable parameter.
3 Related Work
GFlowNets. Since the proposal of GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a), there has been an increasing
interest in improving (Bengio et al., 2021b, Malkin et al., 2022), understanding, and applying this
framework to practical scenarios. It is a general-purpose high-level probabilistic inference frame-
work, and induces fruitful applications (Deleu et al., 2022, Jain et al., 2022a, Zhang et al., 2022a,b).
However, previous works only consider learning based on the terminal reward, which can make
3
it difﬁcult to provide a good training signal for intermediate states, especially when the reward is
sparse (i.e., signiﬁcantly non-zero in only a tiny fraction of the terminal states).
Reinforcement learning (RL). Different from GFlowNets that aim to sample proportionally
to the reward function, RL learns a reward-maximization policy. Although introducing entropy
regularization to RL (Attias, 2003, Haarnoja et al., 2017, 2018, Ziebart, 2010) can improve diversity,
this is limited to tree-structured DAGs. This is because it could only sample a terminal state x in
proportion to the sum of rewards over all trajectories leading to x. It can fail on general (non-tree)
DAGs (Bengio et al., 2021a) for which the same terminal state x can be obtained with a potentially
large number of trajectories (and a very different number of trajectories for different x’s).
Intrinsic motivation. There has been a line of research to incorporate intrinsic motiva-
tion (Burda et al., 2018, Pathak et al., 2017, Zhang et al., 2021) for improving exploration in RL.
Yet, such ideas have not been explored with GFlowNets because the current mathematical frame-
work of GFlowNets only allows for terminal rewards, unlike the sta