ABSTRACT
Reasoning is a fundamental problem for computers and deeply studied in Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence. In this paper, we speciﬁcally focus on answering multi-hop
logical queries on Knowledge Graphs (KGs). This is a complicated task because,
in real-world scenarios, the graphs tend to be large and incomplete. Most previ-
ous works have been unable to create models that accept full First-Order Logical
(FOL) queries, which include negative queries, and have only been able to process
a limited set of query structures. Additionally, most methods present logic opera-
tors that can only perform the logical operation they are made for. We introduce
a set of models that use Neural Networks to create one-point vector embeddings
to answer the queries. The versatility of neural networks allows the framework
to handle FOL queries with Conjunction (∧), Disjunction (∨) and Negation (¬)
operators. We demonstrate experimentally the performance of our model through
extensive experimentation on well-known benchmarking datasets. Besides having
more versatile operators, the models achieve a 10% relative increase over the best
performing state of the art and more than 30% over the original method based on
single-point vector embeddings.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are a type of data structure that can capture many kinds of relationships
between entities (e.g.: Moscow
cityIn
−−−→Russia) and have been popularized since the creation of the
semantic web or its introduction into Google’s search engine. They can contain many kinds of
different information, and they can be widely used in question-answering systems, search engines,
and recommender systems (Palumbo et al., 2017; Xiong et al., 2017a).
Reasoning is a fundamental skill of human brains. For example, we can infer new knowledge based
on known facts and logic rules, and discern patterns/relationships to make sense of seemingly unre-
lated information. It is a multidisciplinary topic and is being studied in psychology, neuroscience,
and artiﬁcial intelligence (Fagin et al., 2003). The ability to reason about the relations between
objects is central to generally intelligent behavior. We can deﬁne reasoning as the process of infer-
ring new knowledge based on known facts and logic rules. Knowledge graphs are a structure used
for storing many kinds of information, therefore the ability to answer complex queries and extract
answers that are not directly encoded in the graph are of high interest to the AI community.
To answer complex queries, the model receives a query divided in logical statements. A full First-
Order Logic (FOL) is necessary to process a wider range of queries, which includes negative queries.
FOL includes the following logical operators: Existential (∃), Conjunction (∧), Disjunction (∨), and
Negation (¬). The power of representation of our logical framework is the key to process complex
queries. However, most frameworks have only been able to process Existential Positive First-Order
Logic (EPFO), which means that negative queries cannot be processed.
For example, One could ask a knowledge graph containing drugs and side effects the following ques-
tion: “What drug can be used to treat pneumonia and does not cause drowsiness?” . The ﬁrst step
to answer such a query is to translate it into logical statements: q =V?·∃V : Treat(Pneumonia,V?)
Source code available on: https://github.com/amayuelas/NNKGReasoning
1
arXiv:2209.14464v1  [cs.AI]  28 Sep 2022
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Figure 1: MLP Framework for KG Reasoning. Representation of a sample query: ”List the teams
where Brazilian football players who were awarded a Ballon d’Or played”. (A) Query represented
by its logical statements and dependency graph. (B) 2D Representation of the answer entities in a
one-point vector space used by the reasoning framework.
∧¬ Cause(Drowsiness,V?). Once the query is divided into logical statements, we obtain the com-
putation graph, a directed acyclic graph (DAG) which deﬁnes the order of operations. Afterwards,
we can start traversing the graph. However, many real-world graphs are incomplete and therefore
traversing them becomes very hard and even computationally impossible. There are many possible
answer entities, and it requires modeling sets of entities. As such, embedding methods become a
good solution to answer these queries. Previous works (Hamilton et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2020; Ren
& Leskovec, 2020) have created methods for embedding the query and the graph into a vector space.
The idea of graph embeddings reduces the problem to simply using nearest-neighbor search to ﬁnd
the answers, without paying attention to the intermediate results.
The embedding approach solves many of the problems of query-answering in knowledge graphs.
In theory, we could answer the queries just by traversing the graph. In practice, graphs are large
and incomplete, and answering arbitrary logical queries becomes a complicated task. The graph
incompleteness means that traversing its edges would not provide the correct answers.
This work aims to create some models that allow complex queries and extract the correct answers
from large incomplete knowledge graphs. To this end, we present a set of models based on Neural
Networks that embed the query and the entities into a one-point vector space. Then, it computes the
distance between the query and the entities to rank the answers according to the likelihood to answer
the query. We use the versatility of Neural Networks to create the operators needed to process FOL
queries.
We conduct experiments using well-known datasets for KG Reasoning: FB15k, FB15-237, and
NELL. The experiments show that our models can effectively answer FOL and provide a noticeable
improvement when compared with the state-of-the-art baselines. Our models provide a relative
improvement of 5% to 10% to the latest state-of-art method and about 30% to 40% when compared
with the method that uses the same idea of one-point vector space embeddings (Hamilton et al.,
2018).
The main contributions of this work are summarized as: (1). New embedding-based methods
for logical reasoning over knowledge graphs: two new models, plus variants, for KG Reasoning.
These methods embed the query and the entities in the same vector space with single-point vectors.
Implementing the logical operators with neural networks provides versatility to create any operator
with virtually the same architecture. (2). Improved performance over the current state of the
art. Experimental results show that the models presented in this paper outperform the selected
baselines: Graph Query Embeddings (GQE) (Hamilton et al., 2018), Query2Box (Q2B) (Ren et al.,
2020), and BetaE (Ren & Leskovec, 2020). (3). Handling of negative queries. Modelling queries
with negation has been an open question in KG Reasoning until recently. BetaE (Ren & Leskovec,
2020) introduced the ﬁrst method able to do so. This work takes advantages of the good relationship
inference capabilities of Neural Networks and uses them to create the negation operator.
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
2 R ELATED WORK
Traditional tasks on graphs include Link Prediction (Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg, 2007), Knowledge
Base Completion (Wang et al., 2015), or basic Query-Answering (one-hop). They are all different
versions of the same problem: Is link (h,r,t) in the KG? or Is t an answer to query (h,r,)? , where
only a variable is missing. However, we face a more complicated problem, known as Knowledge
Graph Reasoning, that may involve several unobserved edges or nodes over massive and incomplete
KGs. In this case, queries can be path queries, conjunctive queries, disjunctive queries or or a
combination of them. A formal deﬁnition of KG Reasoning can be found in Chen et al. (2020), as
stated in Deﬁnition 2.1.
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Reasoning over knowledge graphs). Deﬁning a knowledge graph as:G =⟨E,R,T⟩ ,
whereE,T represent the set of entities,R the set of relations, and the edges inR link two nodes to
form a triple as (h,r,t )∈T . Then, reasoning over a KG is deﬁned as creating a triplet that does
not exist in the originalKG,G′ ={(h,r,t )|h∈E ,r∈R,t∈T , (h,r,t )̸∈G}
Most related to our work are embedding approaches for multi-hop queries over KGs: (Hamilton
et al., 2018), (Ren et al., 2020), (Ren & Leskovec, 2020) and (Das et al., 2016), as well as models
for question answering (Yasunaga et al., 2021), (Feng et al., 2020). The main differences with these
methods rely on the ability to handle full First-Order Logical Queries and using Neural Networks
to deﬁne all logical operators, including the projection. We also deliver a more extensive range of
network implementations.
On a broader outlook, we identify a series of works that aim to solve Knowledge Graph Reasoning
with several different techniques, such as Attention Mechanisms (Wang et al., 2018), Reinforcement
Learning like DeepPath (Xiong et al., 2017b) or DIV A (Chen et al., 2018), orNeural Logic Networks
(Shi et al., 2020), (Qu & Tang, 2019).
3 M ODELS
Both models presented here follow the idea behind Graph Query Embedding – GQE (Hamilton et al.,
2018): Learning to embed the queries into a low dimensional space. Our models differ from it in the
point that logical query operations are represented by geometric operators. In our case, we do not
follow the direct geometric sense and these operators are all represented by Neural Networks, instead
of just the Intersection operator in GQE. Similarly, however, the operators are jointly optimized with
the node embeddings to ﬁnd the optimal representation.
In order to answer a query, the system receives a queryq, represented as a DAG, where the nodes are
the entities and the edges the relationships. Starting with the embeddings ev1,..., evn of its anchor
nodes and apply the logical operations represented by the edges to ﬁnally obtain an embedding q of
the query (Guu et al., 2015).
3.1 F ORMAL PROBLEM DEFINITION
A Knowledge Graph (G) is a heterogeneous graph with a set of entities – nodes – ( V) and a set of
relations – edges – (R). In heterogeneous graphs, there can be different kinds of relations, which are
deﬁned as binary functions r :V×V→{ True,False} that connect two entities with a directed
edge. The goal is to answer First-Order Logical (FOL) Queries. We can deﬁne them as follows:
Deﬁnition 3.1 (First-Order Logical Queries). A ﬁrst-order logical query q is formed by an anchor
entity setVa⊆V , an unknown target variable V? and a series of existentially quantiﬁed variables
V1,...,V k. In its disjunctive normal form (DNF), it is written as a disjunction of conjunctions:
q[V?] = V?·∃V1,...V k :c1∨c2∨...∨cn (1)
whereci represents a conjunctive query of one or several literals:ci = ei1∧ ei2∧...∧ eim. And the
literals represent a relation or its negation: eij =r(vi,v j) or¬v(vi,v j) wherevi,v j are entities and
r∈R .
The entity embeddings are initialized to zero and later learned as part of the training process, along
with the operators’ weights.
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
(a) Representation of MLP for 2 input operators: Pro-
jection, Intersection.
(b) Representation of MLP for 1 input operator:
Negation.
Figure 2: Multi-Later Perceptron Model (MLP) - Network Architecture.
Computation Graph. The Computation Graph can be deﬁned as the Direct Acyclic Graph (DAG)
where the nodes correspond to embeddings and the edges represent the logical operations. The
computation graph can be derived from a query by representing the relations as projections, inter-
sections as merges and negation as complement. This graph shows the order of operations to answer
the queries. Each branch can be computed independently and then merged until the sink node is
reached. Each node represents a point in the embedding space and each edge represents a logical
operation, computed via a Neural Network in our case. The representation of a FOL as a compu-
tation graph can be seen as a heterogeneous tree where ea