ABSTRACT
We present graph attention networks (GATs), novel neural network architectures
that operate on graph-structured data, leveraging masked self-attentional layers to
address the shortcomings of prior methods based on graph convolutions or their
approximations. By stacking layers in which nodes are able to attend over their
neighborhoods’ features, we enable (implicitly) specifying different weights to
different nodes in a neighborhood, without requiring any kind of costly matrix op-
eration (such as inversion) or depending on knowing the graph structure upfront.
In this way, we address several key challenges of spectral-based graph neural net-
works simultaneously, and make our model readily applicable to inductive as well
as transductive problems. Our GAT models have achieved or matched state-of-the-
art results across four established transductive and inductive graph benchmarks:
the Cora, Citeseer and Pubmed citation network datasets, as well as a protein-
protein interaction dataset (wherein test graphs remain unseen during training).
1 I NTRODUCTION
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied to tackle problems such
as image classiﬁcation (He et al., 2016), semantic segmentation (J ´egou et al., 2017) or machine
translation (Gehring et al., 2016), where the underlying data representation has a grid-like structure.
These architectures efﬁciently reuse their local ﬁlters, with learnable parameters, by applying them
to all the input positions.
However, many interesting tasks involve data that can not be represented in a grid-like structure and
that instead lies in an irregular domain. This is the case of 3D meshes, social networks, telecommu-
nication networks, biological networks or brain connectomes. Such data can usually be represented
in the form of graphs.
There have been several attempts in the literature to extend neural networks to deal with arbitrarily
structured graphs. Early work used recursive neural networks to process data represented in graph
domains as directed acyclic graphs (Frasconi et al., 1998; Sperduti & Starita, 1997). Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) were introduced in Gori et al. (2005) and Scarselli et al. (2009) as a generalization
of recursive neural networks that can directly deal with a more general class of graphs, e.g. cyclic,
directed and undirected graphs. GNNs consist of an iterative process, which propagates the node
states until equilibrium; followed by a neural network, which produces an output for each node
∗Work performed while the author was at the Montr´eal Institute of Learning Algorithms.
1
arXiv:1710.10903v3  [stat.ML]  4 Feb 2018
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
based on its state. This idea was adopted and improved by Li et al. (2016), which propose to use
gated recurrent units (Cho et al., 2014) in the propagation step.
Nevertheless, there is an increasing interest in generalizing convolutions to the graph domain. Ad-
vances in this direction are often categorized as spectral approaches and non-spectral approaches.
On one hand, spectral approaches work with a spectral representation of the graphs and have been
successfully applied in the context of node classiﬁcation. In Bruna et al. (2014), the convolution
operation is deﬁned in the Fourier domain by computing the eigendecomposition of the graph Lapla-
cian, resulting in potentially intense computations and non-spatially localized ﬁlters. These issues
were addressed by subsequent works. Henaff et al. (2015) introduced a parameterization of the
spectral ﬁlters with smooth coefﬁcients in order to make them spatially localized. Later, Defferrard
et al. (2016) proposed to approximate the ﬁlters by means of a Chebyshev expansion of the graph
Laplacian, removing the need to compute the eigenvectors of the Laplacian and yielding spatially
localized ﬁlters. Finally, Kipf & Welling (2017) simpliﬁed the previous method by restricting the
ﬁlters to operate in a 1-step neighborhood around each node. However, in all of the aforementioned
spectral approaches, the learned ﬁlters depend on the Laplacian eigenbasis, which depends on the
graph structure. Thus, a model trained on a speciﬁc structure can not be directly applied to a graph
with a different structure.
On the other hand, we have non-spectral approaches (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Atwood & Towsley,
2016; Hamilton et al., 2017), which deﬁne convolutions directly on the graph, operating on groups
of spatially close neighbors. One of the challenges of these approaches is to deﬁne an operator which
works with different sized neighborhoods and maintains the weight sharing property of CNNs. In
some cases, this requires learning a speciﬁc weight matrix for each node degree (Duvenaud et al.,
2015), using the powers of a transition matrix to deﬁne the neighborhood while learning weights for
each input channel and neighborhood degree (Atwood & Towsley, 2016), or extracting and normal-
izing neighborhoods containing a ﬁxed number of nodes (Niepert et al., 2016). Monti et al. (2016)
presented mixture model CNNs (MoNet), a spatial approach which provides a uniﬁed generaliza-
tion of CNN architectures to graphs. More recently, Hamilton et al. (2017) introduced GraphSAGE,
a method for computing node representations in an inductive manner. This technique operates by
sampling a ﬁxed-size neighborhood of each node, and then performing a speciﬁc aggregator over
it (such as the mean over all the sampled neighbors’ feature vectors, or the result of feeding them
through a recurrent neural network). This approach has yielded impressive performance across sev-
eral large-scale inductive benchmarks.
Attention mechanisms have become almost a de facto standard in many sequence-based tasks (Bah-
danau et al., 2015; Gehring et al., 2016). One of the beneﬁts of attention mechanisms is that they
allow for dealing with variable sized inputs, focusing on the most relevant parts of the input to make
decisions. When an attention mechanism is used to compute a representation of a single sequence,
it is commonly referred to as self-attention or intra-attention. Together with Recurrent Neural Net-
works (RNNs) or convolutions, self-attention has proven to be useful for tasks such as machine
reading (Cheng et al., 2016) and learning sentence representations (Lin et al., 2017). However,
Vaswani et al. (2017) showed that not only self-attention can improve a method based on RNNs or
convolutions, but also that it is sufﬁcient for constructing a powerful model obtainingstate-of-the-art
performance on the machine translation task.
Inspired by this recent work, we introduce an attention-based architecture to perform node classiﬁca-
tion of graph-structured data. The idea is to compute the hidden representations of each node in the
graph, by attending over its neighbors, following aself-attention strategy. The attention architecture
has several interesting properties: (1) the operation is efﬁcient, since it is parallelizable across node-
neighbor pairs; (2) it can be applied to graph nodes having different degrees by specifying arbitrary
weights to the neighbors; and (3) the model is directly applicable to inductive learning problems,
including tasks where the model has to generalize to completely unseen graphs. We validate the
proposed approach on four challenging benchmarks: Cora, Citeseer and Pubmed citation networks
as well as an inductive protein-protein interactiondataset, achieving or matching state-of-the-art re-
sults that highlight the potential of attention-based models when dealing with arbitrarily structured
graphs.
It is worth noting that, as Kipf & Welling (2017) and Atwood & Towsley (2016), our work can also
be reformulated as a particular instance of MoNet (Monti et al., 2016). Moreover, our approach of
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
sharing a neural network computation across edges is reminiscent of the formulation of relational
networks (Santoro et al., 2017) and V AIN (Hoshen, 2017), wherein relations between objects or
agents are aggregated pair-wise, by employing a shared mechanism. Similarly, our proposed at-
tention model can be connected to the works by Duan et al. (2017) and Denil et al. (2017), which
use a neighborhood attention operation to compute attention coefﬁcients between different objects
in an environment. Other related approaches include locally linear embedding (LLE) (Roweis &
Saul, 2000) and memory networks (Weston et al., 2014). LLE selects a ﬁxed number of neighbors
around each data point, and learns a weight coefﬁcient for each neighbor to reconstruct each point
as a weighted sum of its neighbors. A second optimization step extracts the point’s feature embed-
ding. Memory networks also share some connections with our work, in particular, if we interpret
the neighborhood of a node as the memory, which is used to compute the node features by attending
over its values, and then is updated by storing the new features in the same position.
2 GAT ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we will present the building block layer used to construct arbitrary graph attention
networks (through stacking this layer), and directly outline its theoretical and practical beneﬁts and
limitations compared to prior work in the domain of neural graph processing.
2.1 G RAPH ATTENTIONAL LAYER
We will start by describing a single graph attentional layer , as the sole layer utilized throughout
all of the GAT architectures used in our experiments. The particular attentional setup utilized by us
closely follows the work of Bahdanau et al. (2015)—but the framework is agnostic to the particular
choice of attention mechanism.
The input to our layer is a set of node features, h ={⃗h1,⃗h2,..., ⃗hN},⃗hi∈ RF , where N is the
number of nodes, andF is the number of features in each node. The layer produces a new set of node
features (of potentially different cardinalityF′), h′ ={⃗h′
1,⃗h′
2,..., ⃗h′
N},⃗h′
i∈ RF ′
, as its output.
In order to obtain sufﬁcient expressive power to transform the input features into higher-level fea-
tures, at least one learnable linear transformation is required. To that end, as an initial step, a shared
linear transformation, parametrized by a weight matrix, W∈ RF ′×F , is applied to every node. We
then perform self-attention on the nodes—a shared attentional mechanism a : RF ′
× RF ′
→ R
computes attention coefﬁcients
eij =a(W⃗hi, W⃗hj) (1)
that indicate theimportance of nodej’s features to nodei. In its most general formulation, the model
allows every node to attend on every other node, dropping all structural information. We inject the
graph structure into the mechanism by performingmasked attention—we only computeeij for nodes
j∈N i, whereNi is some neighborhood of nodei in the graph. In all our experiments, these will
be exactly the ﬁrst-order neighbors ofi (includingi). To make coefﬁcients easily comparable across
different nodes, we normalize them across all choices ofj using the softmax function:
αij = softmax j(eij) = exp(eij)∑
k∈Ni
exp(eik). (2)
In our experiments, the attention mechanism a is a single-layer feedforward neural network,
parametrized by a weight vector⃗a∈ R2F ′
, and applying the LeakyReLU nonlinearity (with negative
input slope α = 0.2). Fully expanded out, the coefﬁcients computed by the attention mechanism
(illustrated by Figure 1 (left)) may then be expressed as:
αij =
exp
(
LeakyReLU
(
⃗aT [W⃗hi∥W⃗hj]
))
∑
k∈Ni exp
(
LeakyReLU
(
⃗aT [W⃗hi∥W⃗hk]
)) (3)
where·T represents transposition and∥ is the concatenation operation.
Once obtained, the normalized attention coefﬁcients are used to compute a linear combination of the
features corresponding to them, to serve as the ﬁnal output features for every node (after potentially
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
αij
⃗a
softmaxj
W⃗hi W⃗hj
⃗h1
⃗h2
⃗h3
⃗h4
⃗h5
⃗h6
⃗ α16
⃗ α11
⃗ α12
⃗ α13
⃗ α14
⃗ α15
⃗h′
1
concat/avg
Figure 1: Left: The attention mechanism a(W⃗hi, W⃗hj) employed by our model, parametrized
by a weight ve