ABSTRACT
Answering complex questions about textual narratives requires reasoning over
both stated context and the world knowledge that underlies it. However, pre-
trained language models (LM), the foundation of most modern QA systems, do
not robustly represent latent relationships between concepts, which is necessary
for reasoning. While knowledge graphs (KG) are often used to augment LMs with
structured representations of world knowledge, it remains an open question how
to effectively fuse and reason over the KG representations and the language con-
text, which provides situational constraints and nuances. In this work, we propose
GREASE LM, a new model that fuses encoded representations from pretrained
LMs and graph neural networks over multiple layers of modality interaction op-
erations. Information from both modalities propagates to the other, allowing lan-
guage context representations to be grounded by structured world knowledge, and
allowing linguistic nuances (e.g., negation, hedging) in the context to inform the
graph representations of knowledge. Our results on three benchmarks in the com-
monsense reasoning ( i.e., CommonsenseQA, OpenbookQA) and medical ques-
tion answering ( i.e., MedQA-USMLE) domains demonstrate that G REASE LM
can more reliably answer questions that require reasoning over both situational
constraints and structured knowledge, even outperforming models 8× larger.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
Question answering is a challenging task that requires complex reasoning over both explicit con-
straints described in the textual context of the question, as well as unstated, relevant knowledge
about the world (i.e., knowledge about the domain of interest). Recently, large pretrained language
models ﬁne-tuned on QA datasets have become the dominant paradigm in NLP for question answer-
ing tasks (Khashabi et al., 2020). After pretraining on an extreme-scale collection of general text
corpora, these language models learn to implicitly encode broad knowledge about the world, which
they are able to leverage when ﬁne-tuned on a domain-speciﬁc downstream QA task. However,
despite the strong performance of this two-stage learning procedure on common benchmarks, these
models struggle when given examples that are distributionally different from examples seen during
ﬁne-tuning (McCoy et al., 2019). Their learned behavior often relies on simple (at times spurious)
patterns to offer shortcuts to an answer, rather than robust, structured reasoning that effectively fuses
the explicit information provided by the context and implicit external knowledge (Marcus, 2018).
On the other hand, massive knowledge graphs (KG), such as Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008), Wiki-
data (Vrande ˇci´c & Kr ¨otzsch, 2014), ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017), and Yago (Suchanek et al.,
2007) capture such external knowledge explicitly using triplets that capture relationships between
entities. Previous research has demonstrated the signiﬁcant role KGs can play in structured rea-
soning and query answering (Ren et al., 2020; 2021; Ren & Leskovec, 2020). However, extending
these reasoning advantages to general QA (where questions and answers are expressed in natural
language and not easily mapped to strict logical queries) requires ﬁnding the right integration of
knowledge from the KG with the information and constraints provided by the QA example. Prior
1All code, data and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/snap-stanford/
GreaseLM.
1
arXiv:2201.08860v1  [cs.CL]  21 Jan 2022
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
KG Retrieval[INT] If it is notused for hair, a round brush is an example of what?  [SEP] art supplies  [SEP] painting
AtLocation
roundbrush
hairbrushRelatedToAtLocation
UsedForUsedFor
ChoiceEntityQuestionEntity
artsupply
Interaction Node
hair
LM Layer
Cross-modal Fuser
GreaseLMLayer
GreaseLM Layer ×𝑀
Uni-modalEncoder LM Layer
MInt
GNN Layer
ℎ!(#$!)ℎ&(#$!)ℎ'()(#$!)···
ℎ!(#) ℎ&(#)
$ℎ'()(#)
···
ℎ'()(#)
𝑒'()(#$!)𝑒!(#$!)𝑒*(#$!)···
̃𝑒'()(#)
𝑒!(#) 𝑒*(#)···
𝑒'()(#)
LM LayerGNN Layer
ℎ!(#+!)
ℎ&(#+!)
$ℎ'()(#+!)
···
ℎ'()(#+!)
̃𝑒'()(#+!)
𝑒!(#+!)
𝑒*(#+!)···
𝑒'()(#+!)
Int
Pooling
Answer Selection
MLP
×𝑁
······[INT]Ifit[SEP]
GreaseLMLayer
⠇
⠇
[INT]Int
MInt
Figure 1: GREASE LM Architecture . The textual context is appended with a special interaction
token and passed through N LM-based unimodal encoding layers. Simultaneously, a local KG of
relevant knowledge is extracted and connected to an interaction node. In the later G REASE LM lay-
ers, the language representation continues to be updated through LM layers and the KG is processed
using a GNN, simulating reasoning over its knowledge. In each layer, after each modality’s repre-
sentation is updated, the representations of the interaction token and node are pulled, concatenated,
and passed through a modality interaction (MInt) unit to mix their representations. In subsequent
layers, the mixed information from the interaction elements mixes with their respective modalities,
allowing knowledge from the KG to affect the representations of individual tokens, and context from
language to affect ﬁne-grained entity knowledge representations in the GNN.
methods propose various ways to leverage both modalities ( i.e., expressive large language models
and structured KGs) for improved reasoning (Mihaylov & Frank, 2018; Lin et al., 2019; Feng et al.,
2020). However, these methods typically fuse the two modalities in a shallow and non-interactive
manner, encoding both separately and fusing them at the output for a prediction, or using one to
augment the input of the other. Consequently, previous methods demonstrate restricted capacity to
exchange useful information between the two modalities. It remains an open question how to effec-
tively fuse the KG and LM representations in a truly uniﬁed manner, where the two representations
can interact in a non-shallow way to simulate structured, situational reasoning.
In this work, we present G REASE LM, a new model that enables fusion and exchange of informa-
tion from both the LM and KG in multiple layers of its architecture (see Figure 1). Our proposed
GREASE LM consists of an LM that takes as input the natural language context, as well as a graph
neural network (GNN) that reasons over the KG. After each layer of the LM and GNN, we design
an interactive scheme to bidirectionally transfer the information from each modality to the other
through specially initialized interaction representations ( i.e., interaction token for the LM; interac-
tion node for the GNN). In such a way, all the tokens in the language context receive information
from the KG entities through the interaction token and the KG entities indirectly interact with the
tokens through the interaction node. By such a deep integration across all layers, G REASE LM en-
ables joint reasoning over both the language context and the KG entities under a uniﬁed framework
agnostic to the speciﬁc language model or graph neural network, so that both modalities can be
contextualized by the other.
GREASE LM demonstrates signiﬁcant performance gains across different LM architectures. We
perform experiments on several standard QA benchmarks: CommonsenseQA, OpenbookQA and
MedQA-USMLE, which require external knowledge across different domains (commonsense rea-
soning and medical reasoning) and use different KGs (ConceptNet and Disease Database). Across
both domains, GREASE LM outperforms comparably-sized prior QA models, including strong ﬁne-
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
tuned LM baselines (by 5.5%, 6.6%, and 1.3%, respectively) and state-of-the-art KG+LM models
(by 0.9%, 1.8%, and 0.5%, respectively) on the three competitive benchmarks. Furthermore, with
the deep fusion of both modalities, GREASE LM exhibits strong performance over baselines on ques-
tions that exhibit textual nuance, such as resolving multiple constraints, negation, and hedges, and
which require effective reasoning over both language context and KG.
2 R ELATED WORK
Integrating KG information has become a popular research area for improving neural QA systems.
Some works explore using two-tower models to answer questions, where a graph representation
of knowledge and language representation are fused with no interaction between them (Wang et al.,
2019). Other works seek to use one modality to ground the other, such as using an encoded represen-
tation of a linked KG to augment the textual representation of a QA example ( e.g., Knowledgeable
Reader, Mihaylov & Frank, 2018; KagNet, Lin et al., 2019; KT-NET, Yang et al., 2019). Others re-
verse the ﬂow of information and use a representation of the text ( e.g., ﬁnal layer of LM) to provide
an augmentation to a graph reasoning model over an extracted KG for the example ( e.g., MHGRN,
Feng et al., 2020; Lv et al., 2020). In all of these settings, however, the interaction between both
modalities is limited as information between them only ﬂows one way.
More recent approaches explore deeper integrations of both modalities. Certain approaches learn to
access implicit knowledge encoded in LMs (Bosselut et al., 2019; Petroni et al., 2019; Hwang et al.,
2021) by training on structured KG data, and then use the LM to generate local KGs that can be
used for QA (Wang et al., 2020; Bosselut et al., 2021). However, these approaches discard the static
KG once they train the LM on its facts, losing important structure that can guide reasoning. More
recently, QA-GNN (Yasunaga et al., 2021) proposed to jointly update the LM and GNN represen-
tations via message passing. However, they use a single pooled representation of the LM to seed
the textual component of this joint structure, limiting the updates that can be made to the textual
representation. In contrast to prior works, we propose to make individual token representations in
the LM and node representations in the GNN mix for multiple layers, enabling representations of
both modalities to reﬂect particularities of the other (e.g., knowledge grounds language; language
nuances speciﬁes which knowledge is important). Simultaneously, we retain the individual structure
of both modalities, which we demonstrate improves QA performance substantially (§5).
Additionally, some works explore integrating knowledge graphs with language models in the pre-
training stage. However, much like for QA, the modality interaction is typically limited to knowl-
edge feeding language (Zhang et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020), rather than designing
interactions across multiple layers. Sun et al. (2020)’s work is perhaps most similar, but they do not
use the same interaction bottleneck, requiring high-precision entity mention spans for linking, and
they limit expressivity through shared modality parameters for the LM and KG.
3 P ROPOSED APPROACH : G REASE LM
In this work, we augment large-scale language models (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lan
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021) with graph reasoning modules over KGs. Our method, G REASE LM
(depicted in Figure 1), consists of two stacked components: (1) a set of unimodal LM layers which
learn an initial representation of the input tokens, and (2) a set of upper cross-modal G REASE LM
layers which learn to jointly represent the language sequence and linked knowledge graph, allowing
textual representations formed from the underlying LM layers and a graph representation of the KG
to mix with one another. We denote the number of LM layers asN, and the number of GREASE LM
layers asM. The total number of layers in our model isN +M.
Notation. In the task ofmultiple choice question answering (MCQA), a generic MCQA-type dataset
consists of examples with a context paragraph c, a question q and a candidate answer set A, all
expressed in text. In this work, we also assume access to an external knowledge graph (KG) G that
provides background knowledge that is relevant to the content of the multiple choice questions.
Given a QA example (c,q,A), and the KGG as 