Abstract
When answering a question, people often draw
upon their rich world knowledge in addi-
tion to the particular context. Recent work
has focused primarily on answering questions
given some relevant document or context,
and required very little general background.
To investigate question answering with prior
knowledge, we present C OMMONSENSE QA:
a challenging new dataset for commonsense
question answering. To capture common sense
beyond associations, we extract from C ON-
CEPT NET (Speer et al., 2017) multiple target
concepts that have the same semantic relation
to a single source concept. Crowd-workers
are asked to author multiple-choice questions
that mention the source concept and discrim-
inate in turn between each of the target con-
cepts. This encourages workers to create ques-
tions with complex semantics that often re-
quire prior knowledge. We create 12,247 ques-
tions through this procedure and demonstrate
the difﬁculty of our task with a large number
of strong baselines. Our best baseline is based
on BERT-large (Devlin et al., 2018) and ob-
tains 56% accuracy, well below human perfor-
mance, which is 89%.
1 Introduction
When humans answer questions, they capitalize
on their common sense and background knowl-
edge about spatial relations, causes and effects,
scientiﬁc facts and social conventions. For in-
stance, given the question “Where was Simon
when he heard the lawn mower?” , one can infer
that the lawn mower is close to Simon, and that
it is probably outdoors and situated at street level.
This type of knowledge seems trivial for humans,
but is still out of the reach of current natural lan-
guage understanding (NLU) systems.
∗ The authors contributed equally
river
waterfall
bridge
valley
a)Sample ConceptNetfor speciﬁc subgraphs
b)Crowd source corresponding natural language questions and two additional distractorsWhere on a rivercan you hold a cup upright to catch water on a sunny day?
✔‍‍‍‍waterfall,   ✘bridge,   ✘valley,✘pebble,✘mountainWhere can I stand on a riverto see water falling without getting wet? ✘waterfall,   
✔bridge,   ✘valley,✘stream,✘bottom
AtLocation
I’m crossing the river, my feet are wet but my body is dry, where am I? ✘waterfall,   ✘bridge,   
✔valley,✘bank,✘island
pebblestreambank AtLocationAtLocationcanyon
AtLocation
AtLocationAtLocationAtLocation
…
Figure 1 : (a) A source concept (in green) and three tar-
get concepts (in blue) are sampled from C ONCEPT NET (b)
Crowd-workers generate three questions, each having one of
the target concepts for its answer (), while the other two tar-
gets are not (). Then, for each question, workers choose an
additional distractor from CONCEPT NET (in red), and author
one themselves (in purple).
Work on Question Answering (QA) has mostly
focused on answering factoid questions, where the
answer can be found in a given context with lit-
tle need for commonsense knowledge (Hermann
et al., 2015; Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Nguyen et al.,
2016; Joshi et al., 2017). Small benchmarks such
as the Winograd Scheme Challenge (Levesque,
2011) and COPA (Roemmele et al., 2011), tar-
geted common sense more directly, but have been
difﬁcult to collect at scale.
Recently, efforts have been invested in devel-
oping large-scale datasets for commonsense rea-
soning. In SW AG (Zellers et al., 2018b), given
a textual description of an event, a probable sub-
sequent event needs to be inferred. However, it
has been quickly realized that models trained on
large amounts of unlabeled data (Devlin et al.,
arXiv:1811.00937v2  [cs.CL]  15 Mar 2019
2018) capture well this type of information and
performance on SW AG is already at human level.
VCR (Zellers et al., 2018a) is another very re-
cent attempt that focuses on the visual aspects of
common sense. Such new attempts highlight the
breadth of commonsense phenomena, and make it
evident that research on common sense has only
scratched the surface. Thus, there is need for
datasets and models that will further our under-
standing of what is captured by current NLU mod-
els, and what are the main lacunae.
In this work, we present C OMMONSENSE QA,
a new dataset focusing on commonsense ques-
tion answering, based on knowledge encoded in
CONCEPT NET (Speer et al., 2017). We propose a
method for generating commonsense questions at
scale by asking crowd workers to author questions
that describe the relation between concepts from
CONCEPT NET (Figure 1). A crowd worker ob-
serves a source concept ( ‘River’ in Figure 1) and
three target concepts ( ‘Waterfall’, ‘Bridge’, ‘Val-
ley’) that are all related by the same C ONCEPT -
NET relation ( AtLocation). The worker then
authors three questions, one per target concept,
such that only that particular target concept is the
answer, while the other two distractor concepts are
not. This primes the workers to add commonsense
knowledge to the question, that separates the tar-
get concept from the distractors. Finally, for each
question, the worker chooses one additional dis-
tractor from C ONCEPT NET, and authors another
distractor manually. Thus, in total, ﬁve candidate
answers accompany each question.
Because questions are generated freely by
workers, they often require background knowl-
edge that is trivial to humans but is seldom explic-
itly reported on the web due to reporting bias (Gor-
don and Van Durme, 2013). Thus, questions in
COMMONSENSE QA have a different nature com-
pared to prior QA benchmarks, where questions
are authored given an input text.
Using our method, we collected 12,247 com-
monsense questions. We present an analysis that
illustrates the uniqueness of the gathered ques-
tions compared to prior work, and the types of
commonsense skills that are required for tackling
it. We extensively evaluate models on C OMMON -
SENSE QA, experimenting with pre-trained mod-
els, ﬁne-tuned models, and reading comprehen-
sion (RC) models that utilize web snippets ex-
tracted from Google search on top of the ques-
tion itself. We ﬁnd that ﬁne-tuning BERT-LARGE
(Devlin et al., 2018) on C OMMONSENSE QA ob-
tains the best performance, reaching an accuracy
of 55.9%. This is substantially lower than human
performance, which is 88.9%.
To summarize, our contributions are:
1. A new QA dataset centered around common
sense, containing 12,247 examples.