Abstract
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) have
recently emerged as a suitable framework for
generating diverse and high-quality molecular
structures by learning from rewards treated as
unnormalized distributions. Previous works in
this framework often restrict exploration by us-
ing predefined molecular fragments as building
blocks, limiting the chemical space that can be
accessed. In this work, we introduce Atomic
GFlowNets (A-GFNs), a foundational generative
model leveraging individual atoms as building
blocks to explore drug-like chemical space more
comprehensively. We propose an unsupervised
pre-training approach using drug-like molecule
datasets, which teaches A-GFNs about inexpen-
sive yet informative molecular descriptors such
as drug-likeliness, topological polar surface area,
and synthetic accessibility scores. These prop-
erties serve as proxy rewards, guiding A-GFNs
towards regions of chemical space that exhibit
desirable pharmacological properties. We further
implement a goal-conditioned finetuning process,
which adapts A-GFNs to optimize for specific tar-
get properties. In this work, we pretrain A-GFN
on a subset of ZINC dataset, and by employing ro-
bust evaluation metrics we show the effectiveness
of our approach when compared to other rele-
vant baseline methods for a wide range of drug
design tasks. The code is accessible at https:
//github.com/diamondspark/AGFN.
1Vancouver Prostate Centre, The University of British
Columbia 2Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal
3Simon Fraser University 4Recursion Pharmaceuticals . Correspon-
dence to: Mohit Pandey <mkpandey@student.ubc.ca>, Gopeshh
Subbaraj <gopeshh.subbaraj@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1. Introduction
GFlowNets are amortized samplers that learn stochastic
policies to sequentially generate compositional objects from
a given unnormalized distribution, i.e. a reward signal. They
can generate diverse sets of high-reward objects, which has a
demonstrated utility in small molecules drug-discovery tasks
(Bengio et al., 2021). Traditionally, GFlowNets used for
molecule generation have focused on fragment-based drug
discovery, i.e. their action space comprises of some prede-
termined fragments as building blocks for molecules. While
producing diverse candidates, fragment-based approaches
limit the pockets of accessible chemical space (Zhu et al.,
2024; Bengio et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024).
A truly explorative generative policy, tapping into the full po-
tential of GFlowNet would be realizable when using atoms
instead of fragments as the action space (Mouchlis et al.,
2021; Meyers et al., 2021; Nishibata & Itai, 1991). On the
other hand, the vastness of this accessible state space makes
training atom-based GFlowNets susceptible to collapse. Ear-
lier atom-based GFlowNets attempt to overcome this issue
by limiting models to small trajectories (Jain et al., 2023).
However, since most commercially available drugs have
molecular weights ranging from 200 to 600 daltons(Bos
& Meinardi, 2000; Bickerton et al., 2012), the molecules
generated from these small trajectories are unlikely to pos-
sess the drug-like characteristics necessary for therapeutic
efficacy. In this work, we propose to scale the trajectory
length of atom-based GFNs by pretraining them with expert
demonstrations, coming in the form of offline trajectories
generated from a dataset of drug-like molecules. Our main
contributions in this paper are as follow:
• We introduce A-GFN, an atom-based GFlowNet for
sampling molecules in proportion to rewards governed
by inexpensive molecular properties.
• We propose a novel strategy for unsupervised pretrain-
ing of A-GFNs by leveraging drug-like molecules us-
ing offline, off-policy training. This pretraining enables
broader exploration of chemical space while maintain-
ing diversity and novelty relative to existing drug-like
molecule datasets.
1
Pretraining Generative Flow Networks with Inexpensive Rewards for Molecular Graph Generation
• We demonstrate that goal-conditioned finetuning of
A-GFNs for sampling molecules with desired proper-
ties offers significant computational advantages over
training A-GFNs from scratch.
• Finally, we demonstrate the practical utility of A-GFN
finetuning for optimization of structual and pharma-
cological properties of drugs, de novo generation of
high-affinity binders, and for lead optimization.