arXiv:2501.02497v3  [cs.AI]  29 Jun 2025
A Survey of Test-Time Compute: From Intuitive Inference to Deliberate
Reasoning
YIXIN JI, Soochow University, China
JUNTAO LI, Soochow University, China
YANG XIANG, Soochow University, China
HAI YE, National University of Singapore, Singapore
KAIXIN WU, Ant Group, China
KAI YAO, Ant Group, China
JIA XU, Ant Group, China
LINJIAN MO, Ant Group, China
MIN ZHANG, Soochow University, China
The remarkable performance of the o1 model in complex reasoning demonstrates that test-time compute scaling can further unlock
the model’s potential, enabling powerful System-2 thinking. However, there is still a lack of comprehensive surveys for test-time
compute scaling. We trace the concept of test-time compute back to System-1 models. In System-1 models, test-time compute addresses
distribution shifts and improves robustness and generalization through parameter updating, input modification, representation
editing, and output calibration. In System-2 models, it enhances the model’s reasoning ability to solve complex problems through
repeated sampling, self-correction, and tree search. We organize this survey according to the trend of System-1 to System-2 thinking,
highlighting the key role of test-time compute in the transition from System-1 models to weak System-2 models, and then to strong
System-2 models. We also point out advanced topics and future directions.1
CCS Concepts: •Computer methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Nature language processing; Nature language genera-
tion.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Large Language Models, Test-time compute, Reasoning
ACM Reference Format:
Yixin Ji, Juntao Li, Yang Xiang, Hai Ye, Kaixin Wu, Kai Yao, Jia Xu, Linjian Mo, and Min Zhang. 2025. A Survey of Test-Time Compute:
From Intuitive Inference to Deliberate Reasoning. 1, 1 (July 2025), 36 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1https://github.com/Dereck0602/Awesome_Test_Time_LLMs.
Authors’ Contact Information: Yixin Ji, jiyixin169@gmail.com, Soochow University, Suzhou, China; Juntao Li, Soochow University, Suzhou, China,
ljt@suda.edu.cn; Yang Xiang, Soochow University, Suzhou, China; Hai Ye, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Kaixin Wu, Ant Group, Hangzhou,
China; Kai Yao, Ant Group, Hangzhou, China; Jia Xu, Ant Group, Hangzhou, China; Linjian Mo, Ant Group, Hangzhou, China; Min Zhang, Soochow
University, Suzhou, China, minzhang@suda.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM 1
2 Ji et al.
System-1 model Weak System-2 model
test-time adaptation test-time reasoning
Perceptual
Distribution Shift Reasoning and Planing
Strong System-2 model
Cognitive
Fig. 1. Illustration of test-time compute in the System-1 and System-2 model.
1 Introduction
Over the past decades, deep learning with its scaling effects has been the driving engine behind the artificial intelligence
revolution. Particularly in the text modality, large language models (LLMs) represented by the GPT series [24, 226, 229]
have demonstrated that larger models and more training data lead to better performance on downstream tasks. However,
on the one hand, further scaling in the training phase becomes difficult due to the scarcity of data and computational
resources [299]; on the other hand, existing models still perform far below expectations in terms 