Abstract
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) have
been shown effective to generate combinatorial
objects with desired properties. We here propose
a new GFlowNet training framework, with policy-
dependent rewards, that bridges keeping flow bal-
ance of GFlowNets to optimizing the expected
accumulated reward in traditional Reinforcement-
Learning (RL). This enables the derivation of
new policy-based GFlowNet training methods, in
contrast to existing ones resembling value-based
RL. It is known that the design of backward poli-
cies in GFlowNet training affects efficiency. We
further develop a coupled training strategy that
jointly solves GFlowNet forward policy training
and backward policy design. Performance analy-
sis is provided with a theoretical guarantee of our
policy-based GFlowNet training. Experiments
on both simulated and real-world datasets verify
that our policy-based strategies provide advanced
RL perspectives for robust gradient estimation
to improve GFlowNet performance. Our code is
available at: github.com/niupuhua1234/GFN-PG.
1. Introduction
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) are a family of
generative models on the space of combinatorial objects X ,
e.g. graphs composed by organizing nodes and edges in a
particular manner, or strings composed of characters in a
particular ordering. GFlowNets aim to solve a challenging
task, sampling x ∈ X with a probability proportional to
some non-negative reward function R(x) that defines an un-
normalized distribution, where |X | can be enormous and the
distribution modes are highly isolated by its combinatorial
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA 2Department of Com-
puter Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA 3Computational Science Intiative, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, Upton, NY , USA. Correspondence to: Xiaon-
ing Qian <xqian@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
nature. GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021; 2023) decompose
the process of generating or sampling x ∈ X by generat-
ing incremental trajectories that start from a null state, pass
through intermediate states, and end at x as the desired ter-
minating state. These trajectory instances are interpreted
as the paths along a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). Prob-
ability measures of trajectories are viewed as the amount
of ‘water’ flows along the DAG, with R(x) being the to-
tal flow of trajectories that end at x, so that following the
forward generating policy defined by the measure, sampled
trajectories will end at x with the probability proportional
to R(x).
GFlowNets bear a similar form of reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) in that they both operate over Markovian Decision
Processes (MDP) with a reward functionR(x), where nodes,
edges, and node transition distributions defined by Marko-
vian flows are considered as states, actions, and stochastic
policies in MDPs. They, however, differ in the following
aspects: the goal of RL problems is to learn optimal policies
that maximize the expected cumulative trajectory reward by
R. For value-based RL methods, the key to achieve this is
by reducing the Temporal Difference (TD) error of Bellman
equations for the estimated state value function V and state-
action value function Q (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Mnih et al.,
2013). GFlowNets amortize the sampling problem into find-
ing some Markovian flow that assigns the proper probability
flow to edges (actions) so that the total flow of trajectories
ending at x is R(x). When studying these in the lens of
RL, the existing GFlowNet training strategies are also value-
based in that they achieve the goal by keeping the balance
flow equation over states of the DAG, whose difference can
be measured in trajectory-wise and edge-wise ways (Bengio
et al., 2021; 2023; Malkin et al., 2022a; Madan et al., 2023).
Due to the similarity of GFlowNet training and RL, investi-
gating the relationships between them can not only deepen
understanding of GFlowNets but also help derive better
training methods from RL. In this work, we propose policy-
dependent rewards for GFlowNet training. This bridges
GFlowNets to RL in that keeping the flow balance over
DAGs can be reformulated as optimizing the expected ac-
cumulated rewards in RL problems. We then derive policy-
based training strategies, which optimize the accumulated
reward by its gradients with respect to (w.r.t.) the forward
policy directly (Sutton et al., 1999; Sutton & Barto, 2018).
1
GFlowNet Training by Policy Gradients
In terms of RL, we acknowledge that the existing GFlowNet
training methods can be considered value-based and have
the advantage of allowing off-policy training over policy-
based methods (Malkin et al., 2022b). Value-based methods,
however, face the difficulty in designing a powerful sampler
that can balance the exploration and exploitation trade-off,
especially when the combinatorial space is enormous with
well-isolated modes. Besides, employing typical annealing
or random-mixing solutions may lead to the learned policy
trapped in local optima. Finally, designing strategies for
powerful samplers vary according to the structure and set-
ting of modeling environments. Policy-based methods, espe-
cially the on-policy ones, transform the design of a powerful
sampler into robust estimation of policy gradients, which
can be achieved by variance reduction techniques (Schul-
man et al., 2016) and improvement of gradient descent di-
rections, such as natural policy gradients (Kakade, 2001)
and mirror policy descent (Zhan et al., 2023). Conservation
policy updates such as Trust-Region Policy Optimization
(TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015; Achiam et al., 2017) and
its first-order approximation, Proximal Policy Optimiza-
tion (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017b), have also been devel-
oped, for example as the backbone of ChatGPT (Ouyang
et al., 2022). Moreover, policy-based methods can be made
off-policy, for example, by importance sampling (Degris
et al., 2012). Our work provides alternative ways to improve
GFlowNet performance via policy-based training. Our con-
tributions can be summarized as follows:
• We reformulate the GFlowNet training as RL over a
special MDP where the reward is policy-dependent,
and the underlying Markovian chain is absorbing.
We further derive policy gradients for this special
MDP and propose policy-based training strategies for
GFlowNets, inspired by policy gradient and TRPO
methods over MDPs with stationary rewards and er-
godic Markovian chains.
• We further formulate the design of backward policies
in GFlowNets as an RL problem and propose a cou-
pled training strategy. While finding a desired forward
policy is the goal of GFlowNet training, well-designed
backward policies, as the components of training objec-
tives, are expected to improve training efficiency (Shen
et al., 2023).
• We provide performance analyses for theoretical guar-
antees of our method for GFlowNet training. Our the-
oretical results are also accompanied by performing
experiments in three application domains, hyper-grid
modeling, biological and molecular sequence design,
and Bayesian Network (BN) structure learning. The ob-
tained experimental results serve as empirical evidence
for the validity of our work and also help empirically
understand the relationship between GFlowNet train-
ing and RL.