Abstract
We show that Langevin MCMC inference in an
energy-based model with latent variables has the
property that the early steps of inference, start-
ing from a stationary point, correspond to prop-
agating error gradients into internal layers, simi-
larly to back-propagation. The error that is back-
propagated is with respect to visible units that
have received an outside driving force pushing
them away from the stationary point. Back-
propagated error gradients correspond to tempo-
ral derivatives of the activation of hidden units.
This observation could be an element of a theory
for explaining how brains perform credit assign-
ment in deep hierarchies as efﬁciently as back-
propagation does. In this theory, the continuous-
valued latent variables correspond to averaged
voltage potential (across time, spikes, and pos-
sibly neurons in the same minicolumn), and neu-
ral computation corresponds to approximate in-
ference and error back-propagation at the same
time.
1. Introduction
It has been hypothesized numerous times (Hinton and Se-
jnowski, 1986; Friston and Stephan, 2007; Berkes et al. ,
2011), that, given a state of sensory information (current
and past inputs), neurons are collectively performing infer-
ence, i.e., moving towards conﬁgurations that better “ex-
plain” the observed sensory data. We can think of the con-
ﬁguration of internal neurons (hidden units or latent vari-
ables) as an “explanation” for the observed sensory data.
Under this hypothesis, when an unexpected signal arrives at
visible neurons1, the other neurons will change their state
(from one that is near a stochastic equilibrium) so as to
better reﬂect that change in input. If this error signal is
1in contact with the outside world, sensory neurons or internal
neurons that directly reﬂect the sensory signal
slowly driving visible neurons towards the externally ob-
served value, this creates a perturbation for the whole net-
work. In this paper, we consider what happens early in this
process, when the perturbation due to the incorrect predic-
tion of visible neurons is propagated towards inner areas
of the brain (hidden units and hidden layers). We show
how the propagation of this perturbation is mathematically
equivalent to the propagation of activations gradients by the
back-propagation algorithm in a deep neural network.
This result assumes that latent variables are continuous-
valued (unlike in the Boltzmann machine), making the sys-
tem an energy-based model similar to the continuous Hop-
ﬁeld net (Hopﬁeld, 1984), deﬁned by an energy function
over both continuous visible and hidden units. It also as-
sumes that the neurons are leaky integrators with injected
noise. As a consequence neural computation corresponds
to gradually going down the energy while adding noise,
which corresponds to running a Langevin Monte-Carlo
Markov chain (MCMC) as inference mechanism.
This work is only a stepping stone. Several points still need
to be elucidated before a complete theory of learning, infer-
ence and credit assignment is elaborated that is both biolog-
ically plausible and makes sense from a machine learning
point of view for whole networks (with global optimization
of the whole network and not being limited to learning of
visible neurons that receive a target). In particular, ener gy
based models require symmetry of connections, but note
that hidden units in the model need not correspond exactly
to actual neurons in the brain (it could be groups of neu-
rons in a cortical microcircuit, for example). It remains to
be shown how a form of symmetry could arise from the
learning procedure itself, for example because of an unsu-
pervised learning objective similar to the one used to train
autoencoders. As shown in this paper, synaptic changes ap-
proximately proportional to the stochastic gradient with re-
spect to the prediction error could be achieved if the synap-
tic updates follow the learning rule studied by Bengioet al.
(2015b) in order to mimic spike-timing dependent plastic-
ity (STDP).
1