ABSTRACT
Logical queries constitute an important subset of questions posed
in knowledge graph question answering systems. Yet, effectively
answering logical queries on large knowledge graphs remains a
highly challenging problem. Traditional subgraph matching based
methods might suffer from the noise and incompleteness of the un-
derlying knowledge graph, often with a prolonged online response
time. Recently, an alternative type of method has emerged whose
key idea is to embed knowledge graph entities and the query in
an embedding space so that the embedding of answer entities is
close to that of the query. Compared with subgraph matching based
methods, it can better handle the noisy or missing information in
knowledge graph, with a faster online response. Promising as it
might be, several fundamental limitations still exist, including the
linear transformation assumption for modeling relations and the
inability to answer complex queries with multiple variable nodes.
In this paper, we propose an embedding based method (NewLook)
to address these limitations. Our proposed method offers three
major advantages. First ( Applicability), it supports four types of
logical operations and can answer queries with multiple variable
nodes. Second (Effectiveness), the proposed NewLook goes beyond
the linear transformation assumption, and thus consistently out-
performs the existing methods. Third (Efficiency), compared with
subgraph matching based methods, NewLook is at least 3 times
faster in answering the queries; compared with the existing embed-
ding based methods, NewLook bears a comparable or even faster
online response and offline training time.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems applications → Data mining ; • Arti-
ficial intelligence → Knowledge representation and reason-
ing; •Computing methodologies → Machine learning.
KEYWORDS
Knowledge graph query; Knowledge graph embedding; Logical
query embedding
ACM Reference Format:
Lihui Liu, Boxin Du, Heng Ji, ChengXiang Zhai, Hanghang Tong. 2021.
Neural-Answering Logical Queries on Knowledge Graphs. In Proceedings of
the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’21, August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8332-5/21/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467375
(KDD ’21), August 14–18, 2021, Virtual Event, Singapore. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467375
1 INTRODUCTION
Question answering on large knowledge graphs has numerous
applications. Many methods have been developed for answering
different types of questions, ranging from single-hop queries [1],
multi-hop queries [18], to logical queries [19]. Among them, logical
queries constitutes an important subset 1 of questions posed in
question answering systems. Examples of logical queries include
“Who is the spouse of Barack Obama? ” “In 2018, who won the Turing
award and where do they come from? ” Despite its key importance, it
remains a difficult challenge to effectively answer logical queries
on large knowledge graphs.
The traditional approaches first transform the original question
into a logical query graph (also known as ‘dependency graph’ or
‘logical DAG graph’, or ‘query graph’ for short) (e.g., [24, 28, 31]).
For example, the aforementioned question “Who is the spouse of
Barack Obama?” can be transformed into a logical query graph
“?
isMarriedTo
− − − − − − − − − →Barack Obama”. We can then use subgraph match-
ing (e.g., [2, 12, 17, 23]) to find the answers from the underlying
knowledge graphs. However, real-world knowledge graphs are of-
ten incomplete with noisy information [7], which makes subgraph
matching based methods suffer from a number of issues, e.g., the
empty-answer problem [27], the wrong answer problem [19] and
so on. Besides, the intrinsic high computational complexity of sub-
graph matching-based methods often lead to a prolonged online
response time [19].
Recently, an alternative type of method for answering logical
queries has emerged (e.g., [1, 5, 7, 11, 19]). The key idea is to embed
the logical query graph and the knowledge graph entities into the
same low-dimensional vector space, so that the embedding of enti-
ties that answer the query graph is close to that of the query. There-
fore, after the embedding is obtained, answering logical queries
essentially becomes a similarity search problem in the embedding
space. In this way, the reasonable answers could be found even
when the knowledge graph is incomplete or noisy. What is more,
compared with subgraph matching based methods, embedding
based methods tend to have a faster online response.
Besides its promising results, several fundamental limitations
still exist with embedding based methods. Let us elaborate us-
ing four most recent approaches as examples, including GQE [5],
Query2Box [19], BetaE [20] and EmQL [21]. First, the existing meth-
ods like GQE [5] and Query2Box [19] treat the one hop transition be-
tween two nodes in the embedding space as a linear transformation.
This makes themselves suffer from severe cascading errors [8], espe-
cially when dealing with long, complex logical queries with multiple
inter-dependent paths. Second, GQE [5] and Query2Box [19] only
1Examples of questions which cannot be represented as logical queries include “Which
is the best university in computer science? ”“How many programmers did Google hire last
year?”
Figure 1: Accuracy and query time of different meth-
ods. Compared with the existing embedding based meth-
ods (GQE [5] and Query2box [19]), the proposed method
(NewLook) is significantly better in accuracy with a com-
parable online query response time; compared with the sub-
graph matching based methods (G-Ray [23], FilM [15] and
GFinder [12]), the proposed NewLook is both more accurate
and faster. The results are for query ‘3ippu’ in Figure 8 on
NELL dataset. See Section 4.3 for more details.
support three logical operations, namely projection, intersection
and union, and thus limit their applicability. Although BetaE [20]
further supports the negation operation and EmQL [21] also sup-
ports more logical operations: relation filtering and the difference
operation. Nonetheless, both methods suffer from some subtle defi-
ciency in modeling difference operation (see Section 3.1 for more
discussions).
In response, we propose an embedding based algorithm (NewLook)
to answer logical queries on knowledge graphs. Compared with pre-
vious methods, our method has three distinctive advantages. First,
we go beyond the linear transformation assumption and model each
type of logical operation as a neural network. In this way, we can
significantly mitigate the cascading errors. Second, in addition to
projection, intersection and union, our method also supports a new
type of logical operation, namely difference. Third, our method can
simultaneously find the geometric embedding for multiple variable
nodes in the logical query, which not only broadens the applicability
of our method, but also offers a pruning method for subgraph match-
ing based algorithms. We evaluate NewLook on three benchmark
datasets and show that our method (1) outperforms both subgraph
matching based methods and prior embedding based methods; and
(2) is computationally efficient. See Figure 1 for a comparison.
The main contributions of the paper are
• We propose an algorithm NewLook which can not only
mitigate the cascading error problem but also support more
logical operations.
• we redesign the projection operation, intersection operation
and loss function which greatly improve the accuracy. More-
over, NewLook can learn a box embedding for each variable
node in the logical query with high accuracy.
• We perform extensive empirical evaluations to demonstrate
the efficacy of our model.
2 PROBLEM DEFINITION
Table 1 gives the main notations used throughout this paper. We use
upper case calligraphic font letters for graphs (e.g. G, Q, C), lower
case bold letters (e.g., e, b) for embedding vectors. A knowledge
graph is denoted as G = (𝑉 , 𝑅, 𝑇) where 𝑉 = {𝑣1, 𝑣2, ..., 𝑣𝑛 } is the
Table 1: Notations and definitions
Symbols Definition
G = (𝑉 , 𝑅, 𝑇) the knowledge graph
𝑣𝑖 the 𝑖th entity/node in knowledge graph
e𝑖 the embedding of entity/node 𝑣𝑖
𝑟𝑖 the 𝑖th relation/edge in knowledge graph
Q = (𝑈 , 𝑅, 𝐿) a dependency graph
𝑈 the node set of Q
𝑢𝑖 the 𝑖th node in 𝑈
𝐿 Logical operations
b𝑖 the box embedding of 𝑈𝑖
b𝑐
𝑖 the center of b𝑖
b𝑜
𝑖 the offset of b𝑖
p𝑖 the embedding of 𝑟𝑖
p𝑐
𝑖 the center embedding of p𝑖
p𝑜
𝑖 the offset embedding of p𝑖
set of nodes/entities, 𝑅 = {𝑟1, 𝑟2, ..., 𝑟𝑚 } is the set of relations and
𝑇 is the set of triples. Each triple in the knowledge graph can be
denoted as (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡) where ℎ ∈ 𝑉 is the head (i.e., subject) of the triple,
𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 is the tail (i.e., object) of the triple and 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 is the edge (i.e.,
relation, predicate) of the triple which connects the head ℎ to the
tail 𝑡. The knowledge graph structure information can be denoted
as an 𝑛 × 𝑛 adjacency matrix A with A(𝑖, 𝑗 ) = 1 if 𝑣𝑖 is connected
with 𝑣 𝑗 , and A(𝑖, 𝑗 ) = 0 otherwise. For the computational efficiency,
we randomly divide all the nodes in the knowledge graph into
different groups, and use a three dimensional tensor T to denote
the connectivity between different groups. For each relation 𝑟𝑖 ∈ 𝑅,
T (𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ) = 1 if any node in group 𝑗 connects with any node in
group 𝑘 by relation 𝑟𝑖. For each node 𝑣𝑖, we use a row one-hot
vector x𝑖 to denote which group it belongs to. If node 𝑣𝑖 belongs
to group 𝑗 then x𝑖 [ 𝑗] = 1, otherwise, it equals to 0. For a node
set 𝑆, we can use a row multi-hot vector x𝑆 to denote its group
information. If any node in 𝑆 belongs to group 𝑗, then x𝑆 [ 𝑗] = 1,
otherwise, it equals to 0.
Following the definition in [5], [19], [20], a first-order logic query
contains a non-variable anchor entity set ˜𝑈 ⊆ 𝑉 , existentially
quantified bound variables 𝑢1, ..., 𝑢𝑘 and a single target variable 𝑢?,
which provides the query answer. In mathematical form, it can be
defined as𝑞[𝑢?] = 𝑢?.∃𝑢1, ..., 𝑢𝑘 : 𝜋1 ∨𝜋2 ∨... ∨𝜋𝑛, where 𝜋𝑖 = 𝜚𝑖1 ∧
𝜚𝑖1∧...∧𝜚𝑖𝑚 and 𝜚𝑖𝑚 = 𝜛( ˜𝑢𝑎, 𝑢𝑖 ) or 𝜛(𝑢𝑖, 𝑢𝑗 ) or 𝜛(𝑢𝑖, 𝑢?). 𝜛 belongs
to projection or negation [ 20]. For example, GQE [ 5] considers
conjunctive logical query, Query2Box [ 19] considers existential
positive first-order (EPFO) logical queries. In this paper, we consider
logical queries which can support four kinds of logical operations:
projection, intersection, union and difference. Besides this, instead
of constraining a logical query only having a single target variable,
we treat all non-anchor nodes as target variables.
A logical query graph (i.e., dependency graph) Q = (𝑈 , 𝑅, 𝐿) is
the graph expression of the logical query, where the upper case
letter 𝑈 = { ˜𝑈 , 𝑈?} denotes the node set, with ˜𝑈 as the anchor node
set and 𝑈? as the variable node set (we use ˜𝑢 𝑗 and 𝑢 𝑗 to index the
specific node in ˜𝑈 and 𝑈? respectively), 𝑅 denotes the relation set
which is the same as the relation set of G, and 𝐿 denotes logical
operations. According to the definition of first-order logic, Q is
a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), with the anchor entities as the
source nodes of the DAG [19]. An example of logical query graph
is given in the first column of Figure 2.
Given a knowledge graph G, a three dimensional tensor T , the
one-hot vector x𝑖 for each node 𝑣𝑖 and a logical query 