Abstract
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) have demonstrated signiﬁcant perfor-
mance improvements for generating diverse discrete objects x given a reward
functionR(x), indicating the utility of the object and trained independently from
the GFlowNet by supervised learning to predict a desirable propertyy givenx. We
hypothesize that this can lead to incompatibility between the inductive optimization
biases in training R and in training the GFlowNet, potentially leading to worse
samples and slow adaptation to changes in the distribution. In this work, we build
upon recent work on jointly learning energy-based models with GFlowNets and ex-
tend it to learn the joint over multiple variables, which we call Joint Energy-Based
GFlowNets (JEBGFNs), such as peptide sequences and their antimicrobial activity.
Joint learning of the energy-based model, used as a reward for the GFlowNet,
can resolve the issues of incompatibility since both the reward function R and
the GFlowNet sampler are trained jointly. We ﬁnd that this joint training or joint
energy-based formulation leads to signiﬁcant improvements in generating anti-
microbial peptides. As the training sequences arose out of evolutionary or artiﬁcial
selection for high antibiotic activity, there is presumably some structure in the
distribution of sequences that reveals information about the antibiotic activity. This
results in an advantage to modeling their joint generatively vs. pure discriminative
modeling. We also evaluate JEBGFN in an active learning setting for discovering
anti-microbial peptides.
1 Introduction
Biological sequence design is a problem of paramount importance for various use cases such as
design of new materials, discovering new drugs, and so on. However, designing these sequences is a
time consuming process requiring a lot of domain expertise and many expensive wet lab experiments.
Depending on the use case, this can involve searching over an exponentially large combinatorial
space (upto orders of 2060).
Over the past couple of years, a spate of works [1, 7, 19, 8, 27, 26] have leveraged recent progress in
deep generative methods to aid the search for viable biological sequences. These methods, which fall
primarily in the broad areas of reinforcement learning (RL) and Bayesian optimization (BO), typically
involve ﬁnding sequences thatmaximize certain properties. Consequently, they suffer from one key
drawback, the generated sequences have low diversity, i.e. the generated sequences are “similar".
Considering the diverse nature of viable biological targets, and the drug or material discovery process,
diversity of generated sequences is a key consideration [20, 12].
Generative Flow Networks [GFlowNets; 2, 3] are a family of probabilistic models that alleviate
this issue by sampling sequences with probability proportional to the reward, as opposed to reward
maximization, resulting in generation of diverse candidates. GFlowNet-AL [12] leveraged GFlowNets
∗Correspondence to:ca10@iitbbs.ac.in
Workshop on Human in the Loop Learning, NeurIPS 2022.
arXiv:2211.00568v2  [cs.LG]  2 Nov 2022
in an active learning setting to generate diverse and novel biological sequences. In each round of
active learning GFlowNet-AL learns a predictor for estimating the rewardR from the oracle using
the data collected so far. This predictor is then used as the reward for training a GFlowNet. Since
the reward function and the GFlowNet are learned separately, we hypothesize that this can lead
to incompatibility between the rewardR and the GFlowNet, potentially leading to poor quality of
samples being generated and slow adaptation to changes in the distribution. Moreover, since the
generation of sequences is only based on a single reward, this method cannot be used to generate
sequences with a speciﬁc set of desired properties. For instance, a practical problem of interest is to
generate peptide sequences that target a speciﬁc class of bacteria, rather than having general toxicity.
Energy-based models (EBMs) [15, 10, 24] have recently been successfully applied on a wide variety
of probabilistic modelling and inference tasks. In particular, [16, 28] demonstrate that EBMs adapt
quickly to changes in the distribution in continual setting. [ 29] proposed a framework for jointly
training an energy function with a GFlowNet sampler. The GFlowNet samples data proportional to the
reward (exp(-energy)) associated with the learned energy function, which models the unnormalised
data distribution. The energy function is learnt via contrastive divergence, and the required negative
samples are generated by the GFlowNet. Since the rewardR (i.e. the energy) and the GFlowNet are
both trained via an alternating optimization paradigm, we hypothesize that it reduces the presumed
incompatibility faced by training them separately.
We extend the framework presented in [29] to model the joint distribution over multiple variables.
In particular, we study the problem of learning the joint p(x,y ) wherex is the data, and y is the
corresponding label. Our work offers a GFlowNet-based alternative to prior work on modelling the
joint [23, 6, 5, 11, 21, 14] for compositional discrete spaces. To summarize, our key contributions are
as follows:
• We introduce Joint Energy-based GFlowNets (JEB-GFN), an extension of Energy-Based
GFlowNets for modelling joint distributions over multiple variables.
• We empirically demonstrate that JEB-GFN can learn the joint distribution over two variables,
datax and its corresponding labely, and leverage it for conditional generation.
• Finally, we evaluate JEB-GFN for generating peptides with anti-microbial properties in a single
round as well as active learning setting.
2 Background
Generative Flow Networks [2, 3, GFlowNets;] view the problem of sampling discrete objectsx∈X
as a problems of learning a control policy. GFlowNets learn a stochastic policyπ to generatex such
that the marginal likelihood of samplingx∼π(x) is proportional to a non-negative rewardR(x). In
this section we review some basic notation and terminology and refer the reader to [3] for a more
thorough discussion.
Generative Flow Networks are a probabilistic framework for learning stochastic policies for discrete
data. They model the discrete generational process of discrete objectsx∈X , although (author?) [3]
propose a methodology for also generating continuous-valued objects. Acompositional objectx∈X ,
is modeled as a trajectory comprising of a sequence of discrete actions from a set of actionsA. At
each step of this trajectory, we obtain a partially constructed object, which we call states∈S , which
is modiﬁed by the next action. The space of possible trajectories is described by a directed acyclic
graph (DAG),G = (S,A), whose verticesS are the set of all possible states (partially constructed
objects along with a special empty states0) and the edges at each stateA are actions that modify one
state to another. Trajectories starting ats0 and terminating atx∈X are called complete trajectories,
denoted byτ∈T whereT is the set of all possible complete trajectories. Note that while this graph
does not need to be instantiated and can be arbitrary in general. We consider the DAG case, so the
actions can only be constructive.
The trajectory ﬂow is the unnormalized probability density over the set of all complete trajectories
τ∈T ; deﬁned as a non negative functionF (τ ). For some constantZ, we can compute the probability
associated with the trajectory asPF (τ ) = F (τ )/Z. PF (st+1|st) is called the forward policy, and
sampling iteratively from this forward policy allows one to generate complete trajectories, with
a probability proportional to the unnormalized density F . We denote the marginal probability of
sampling complete trajectories followingPF terminating inx asπ(x).
2
The underlying learning problem solved by GFlowNets is to estimate aPF such that the marginal
likelihood of generating objectx is proportional to a given non-negative rewardR(x). [2] introduced
a ﬂow-matching objective to learn this policy. In this work, we focus on the Trajectory Balance
view introduced by [17]. We estimate a forward policyPF , a backward policyPB and a partition
functionZ. The backward policyPB is a distribution over the set of parents given an input states,
which prescribes how to sample trajectories starting at any terminal state x and terminating ins0,
i.e. ways in whichx could have been constructed. The partition functionZ denotes the total reward∑
τ∈T F (τ ) = ∑
xR(x) and is also estimated during training (by Zθ below). The parameters θ
parameterizingPF (−|s;θ),PB(−|s;θ),Zθ are estimated by minimizing the following per-trajectory
loss:
L(τ ;θ) =
(
log Zθ
∏t=n−1
t=0 PF (st+1|st;θ)
R(sn) ∏t=n−1
t=0 PB(st|st+1;θ)
)2
. (1)
[12] introduced GFlowNet-AL, an active learning algorithm leveraging GFlowNets for generating
diverse candidates that maximize some property of the candidate that is expensive to evaluate (oracle).
It consists of several rounds, each consisting of generating a batch of candidates that are evaluated with
the oracle. To generate each batch of candidates, it ﬁrst learns a supervised predictor to approximate
the oracle and its epistemic uncertainty using a dataset of past evaluations of the oracle. This predictor
(and the epistemic uncertainty associated with it) is then converted via an acquisition function into
the reward function for training a GFlowNet. As the GFlowNet and reward are trained separately, we
have observed that adaptation is slow over rounds (especially if retraining the reward function from
scratch) and can result in inconsistencies between the GFlowNet and the reward. This motivates the
approach proposed here and described below.
3 Energy Based Modelling with GFlowNets
As introduced in section 2, the training regime of GFlowNets, requires an explicit reward function
R(x). Leveraging GFlowNets for generative modelling would require setting the reward function
to the unnormalized probability of a particular sample. In practice, one does not have access to
the closed-form solution of this unnormalised probability, but only to data sampled from a target
distribution. To combat this issue, [ 29] introduced the framework of Energy Based GFlowNets
(EB-GFNs), where the reward function for the GFlowNet is set using the output from an energy based
model (EBM)Eφ(x) learned simultaneously. The ﬁnal products obtained include not only be the
trained GFlowNet but also the energy based modelEφ(x).
The EBM (associated with the GFlowNet) is trained via the Contrastive Divergence algorithm [4],
where the negative samplesx′ are sampled from a GFlowNet policy (x′∼PT (x′)). Note that,PT (x′)
denotes marginalizing the forward trajectory distributionPF (τ ) over its non-terminating states. With
contrastive divergence, one samplesx′ from a K-step Metropolis Hastings chain, which starts from
a true data samplex∼pdata(x). Thanks to the backward policyPB, one can easily perform such
MCMC steps with a GFlowNet [29]. For a perfectly trained GFlowNet, the terminating probability
distribution will be equal to the energy distribution. The updates toφ (the parameter of the energy
model) are made proportional to Eq. 2:
Ex∼pdata(x)∇φEφ(x)− Ex′∼PT (x′)∇φEφ(x′). (2)
We introduce JEB-GFN, which extends the above formulation to model the joint distribution over
multiple variables, in particular, datax and corresponding labely. The unnormalized joint probability
distribution is denoted byEφ(x,y ). The parameters of the EBM are updated proportional to
E(x,y)∼pdata(x,y)∇φEφ(x,y )− E(x′,y′)∼PT (x′,y′)∇φEφ(x′,y′) (3)
Similar to the EB-GFN formulation, the EBM is trained via contrastive divergence, where a K-Step
MCMC is used to generate negative samples, given data sampled from the original data distribution.
This new generated sample is accepted or rejected depending on the Metropolis-Hastings rule.
Concretely, ﬁrst, a K-Step backward trajectory (τ) is sampled with a multiple calls to th