Abstract
Energy based models (EBMs) are appealing due to their generality and simplicity
in likelihood modeling, but have been traditionally difﬁcult to train. We present
techniques to scale MCMC based EBM training on continuous neural networks,
and we show its success on the high-dimensional data domains of ImageNet32x32,
ImageNet128x128, CIFAR-10, and robotic hand trajectories, achieving better
samples than other likelihood models and nearing the performance of contemporary
GAN approaches, while covering all modes of the data. We highlight some unique
capabilities of implicit generation such as compositionality and corrupt image
reconstruction and inpainting. Finally, we show that EBMs are useful models across
a wide variety of tasks, achieving state-of-the-art out-of-distribution classiﬁcation,
adversarially robust classiﬁcation, state-of-the-art continual online class learning,
and coherent long term predicted trajectory rollouts.
1 Introduction
Learning models of the data distribution and generating samples are important problems in machine
learning for which a number of methods have been proposed, such as Variational Autoencoders
(V AEs) [Kingma and Welling, 2014] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [Goodfellow
et al., 2014].In this work, we advocate for continuous energy-based models (EBMs), represented as
neural networks, for generative modeling tasks and as a building block for a wide variety of tasks.
These models aim to learn an energy functionE(x) that assigns low energy values to inputs x in the
data distribution and high energy values to other inputs. Importantly, they allow the use of an implicit
sample generation procedure, where sample x is found from x∼e−E(x) through MCMC sampling.
Combining implicit sampling with energy-based models for generative modeling has a number of
conceptual advantages compared to methods such as V AEs and GANs which use explicit functions to
generate samples:
Simplicity and Stability: An EBM is the only object that needs to be trained and designed. Separate
networks are not tuned to ensure balance (for example, [He et al., 2019] point out unbalanced training
can result in posterior collapse in V AEs or poor performance in GANs [Kurach et al., 2018]).
Sharing of Statistical Strength: Since the EBM is the only trained object, it requires fewer model
parameters than approaches that use multiple networks. More importantly, the model being concen-
trated in a single network allows the training process to develop a shared set of features as opposed to
developing them redundantly in separate networks.
Adaptive Computation Time: Implicit sample generation in our work is an iterative stochastic
optimization process, which allows for a trade-off between generation quality and computation time.
∗Work done at OpenAI
∗Correspondence to: yilundu@mit.edu
∗Additional results, source code, and pre-trained models are available at https://sites.google.com/view/igebm
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
This allows for a system that can make fast coarse guesses or more deliberate inferences by running
the optimization process longer. It also allows for reﬁnement of external guesses.
Flexibility Of Generation: The power of an explicit generator network can become a bottleneck on
the generation quality. For example, V AEs and ﬂow-based models are bound by the manifold structure
of the prior distribution and consequently have issues modeling discontinuous data manifolds, often
assigning probability mass to areas unwarranted by the data. EBMs avoid this issue by directly
modeling particular regions as high or lower energy.
Compositionality: If we think of energy functions as costs for a certain goals or constraints, summa-
tion of two or more energies corresponds to satisfying all their goals or constraints [Mnih and Hinton,
2004, Haarnoja et al., 2017]. While such composition is simple for energy functions (or product of
experts [Hinton, 1999]), it induces complex changes to the generator that may be difﬁcult to capture
with explicit generator networks.
Despite these advantages, energy-based models with implicit generation have been difﬁcult to use on
complex high-dimensional data domains. In this work, we use Langevin dynamics [Welling and Teh,
2011], which uses gradient information for effective sampling and initializes chains from random
noise for more mixing. We further maintain a replay buffer of past samples (similarly to [Tieleman,
2008] or [Mnih et al., 2013]) and use them to initialize Langevin dynamics to allow mixing between
chains. An overview of our approach is presented in Figure 1.
1 2 3 K
Langevin Dynamics
Eq. 1
X~
X-
 X+
ML Objective
Eq. 2
Replay Buffer Training Data
Figure 1: Overview of our method and the
interrelationship of the components involved.
Empirically, we show that energy-based models trained
on CIFAR-10 or ImageNet image datasets generate higher
quality image samples than likelihood models and near-
ing that of contemporary GANs approaches, while not
suffering from mode collapse. The models exhibit prop-
erties such as correctly assigning lower likelihood to out-
of-distribution images than other methods (no spurious
modes) and generating diverse plausible image comple-
tions (covering all data modes). Implicit generation allows
our models to naturally denoise or inpaint corrupted im-
ages, convert general images to an image from a speciﬁc
class, and generate samples that are compositions of mul-
tiple independent models.
Our contributions in this work are threefold. Firstly, we
present an algorithm and techniques for training energy-
based models that scale to challenging high-dimensional
domains. Secondly, we highlight unique properties of energy-based models with implicit generation,
such as compositionality and automatic decorruption and inpainting. Finally, we show that energy-
based models are useful across a series of domains, on tasks such as out-of-distribution generalization,
adversarially robust classiﬁcation, multi-step trajectory prediction and online learning.
2 Related Work
Energy-based models (EBMs) have a long history in machine learning. Ackley et al. [1985], Hinton
[2006], Salakhutdinov and Hinton [2009] proposed latent based EBMs where energy is represented
as a composition of latent and observable variables. In contrast Mnih and Hinton [2004], Hinton et al.
[2006] proposed EBMs where inputs are directly mapped to outputs, a structure we follow. We refer
readers to [LeCun et al., 2006] for a comprehensive tutorial on energy models.
The primary difﬁculty in training EBMs comes from effectively estimating and sampling the partition
function. One approach to train energy based models is sample the partition function through
amortized generation. Kim and Bengio [2016], Zhao et al. [2016], Haarnoja et al. [2017], Kumar et al.
[2019] propose learning a separate network to generate samples, which makes these methods closely
connected to GANs [Finn et al., 2016], but these methods do not have the advantages of implicit
sampling noted in the introduction. Furthermore, amortized generation is prone to mode collapse,
especially when training the sampling network without an entropy term which is often approximated
or ignored.
An alternative approach is to use MCMC sampling to estimate the partition function. This has an
advantage of provable mode exploration and allows the beneﬁts of implicit generation listed in the
2
introduction. Hinton [2006] proposed Contrastive Divergence, which uses gradient free MCMC
chains initialized from training data to estimate the partition function. Similarly, Salakhutdinov and
Hinton [2009] apply contrastive divergence, while Tieleman [2008] proposes PCD, which propagates
MCMC chains throughout training. By contrast, we initialize chains from random noise, allowing
each mode of the model to be visited with equal probability. But initialization from random noise
comes at a cost of longer mixing times. As a result we use Gradient based MCMC (Langevin
Dynamics) for more efﬁcient sampling and to offset the increase of mixing time which was also
studied previously in [Teh et al., 2003, Xie et al., 2016]. We note that HMC [Neal, 2011] may be an
even more efﬁcient gradient algorithm for MCMC sampling, though we found Langevin Dynamics to
be more stable. To allow gradient based MCMC, we use continuous inputs, while most approaches
have used discrete inputs. We build on idea of PCD and maintain a replay buffer of past samples to
additionally reduce mixing times.
3 Energy-Based Models and Sampling
Given a datapoint x, letEθ(x)∈ R be the energy function. In our work this function is represented
by a deep neural network parameterized by weights θ. The energy function deﬁnes a probability
distribution via the Boltzmann distributionpθ(x) = exp(−Eθ(x))
Z(θ) , whereZ(θ) =
∫
exp(−Eθ(x))dx
denotes the partition function. Generating samples from this distribution is challenging, with previous
work relying on MCMC methods such as random walk or Gibbs sampling [Hinton, 2006]. These
methods have long mixing times, especially for high-dimensional complex data such as images. To
improve the mixing time of the sampling procedure, we use Langevin dynamics which makes use of
the gradient of the energy function to undergo sampling
˜xk = ˜xk−1− λ
2∇xEθ(˜xk˘1) +ωk, ωk∼N (0,λ ) (1)
where we let the above iterative procedure deﬁne a distributionqθ such that ˜xK∼qθ. As shown by
Welling and Teh [2011] asK→∞ andλ→ 0 thenqθ→pθ and this procedure generates samples
from the distribution deﬁned by the energy function. Thus, samples are generated implicitly† by the
energy functionE as opposed to being explicitly generated by a feedforward network.
In the domain of images, if the energy network has a convolutional architecture, energy gradient
∇xE in (1) conveniently has a deconvolutional architecture. Thus it mirrors a typical image generator
network architecture, but without it needing to be explicitly designed or balanced. We take two views
of the energy functionE: ﬁrstly, it is an object that deﬁnes a probability distribution over data and
secondly it deﬁnes an implicit generator via (1).
3.1 Maximum Likelihood Training
We want the distribution deﬁned byE to model the data distributionpD, which we do by minimizing
the negative log likelihood of the dataLML(θ) = Ex∼pD [− logpθ(x)] where− logpθ(x) =Eθ(x)−
logZ(θ). This objective is known to have the gradient (see [Turner, 2005] for derivation)∇θLML =
Ex+∼pD [∇θEθ(x+)]− Ex−∼pθ [∇θEθ(x−)]. Intuitively, this gradient decreases energy of the
positive data samples x+, while increasing the energy of the negative samples x− from the modelpθ.
We rely on Langevin dynamics in (1) to generateqθ as an approximation ofpθ:
∇θLML≈ Ex+∼pD
[
∇θEθ(x+)
]
− Ex−∼qθ
[
∇θEθ(x−)
]
. (2)
This is similar to the gradient of the Wasserstein GAN objective [Arjovsky et al., 2017], but with an
implicit MCMC generating procedure and no gradient through sampling. This lack of gradient is
important as it controls between the diversity in likelihood models and the mode collapse in GANs.
The approximation in (2) is exact when Langevin dynamics generates samples fromp, which happens
after a sufﬁcient number of steps (mixing time). We show in the supplement thatpd andq appear to
match each other in distribution, showing evidence thatp matchesq. We note that even in cases when
a particular chain does not fully mix, since our initial proposal distribution is a uniform distribution,
all modes are still equally likely to be explored.
†Deterministic case of procedure in (1) is x = arg minE(x), which makes connection to implicit functions
more clear.
3
3.2 Sample Replay Buffer
Langevin dynamics does not place restrictions on sample initialization ˜x0 given sufﬁcient sampling
steps. However initialization plays an crucial role in mixing time. Persistent Contrastive Divergence
(PCD) [Tieleman, 2008] maintains a single persistent chain to improve mixi