Abstract
In this paper, we explore different ways to extend a recurrent neural network
(RNN) to a deep RNN. We start by arguing that the concept of depth in an RNN
is not as clear as it is in feedforward neural networks. By carefully analyzing
and understanding the architecture of an RNN, however, we ﬁnd three points of
an RNN which may be made deeper; (1) input-to-hidden function, (2) hidden-to-
hidden transition and (3) hidden-to-output function. Based on this observation, we
propose two novel architectures of a deep RNN which are orthogonal to an earlier
attempt of stacking multiple recurrent layers to build a deep RNN (Schmidhu-
ber, 1992; El Hihi and Bengio, 1996). We provide an alternative interpretation
of these deep RNNs using a novel framework based on neural operators. The
proposed deep RNNs are empirically evaluated on the tasks of polyphonic music
prediction and language modeling. The experimental result supports our claim
that the proposed deep RNNs beneﬁt from the depth and outperform the conven-
tional, shallow RNNs.
1 Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNN, see, e.g., Rumelhart et al., 1986) have recently become a popular
choice for modeling variable-length sequences. RNNs have been successfully used for various task
such as language modeling (see, e.g., Graves, 2013; Pascanuet al., 2013a; Mikolov, 2012; Sutskever
et al., 2011), learning word embeddings (see, e.g., Mikolovet al., 2013a), online handwritten recog-
nition (Graves et al., 2009) and speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013).
In this work, we explore deep extensions of the basic RNN. Depth for feedforward models can
lead to more expressive models (Pascanu et al., 2013b), and we believe the same should hold for
recurrent models. We claim that, unlike in the case of feedforward neural networks, the depth of an
RNN is ambiguous. In one sense, if we consider the existence of a composition of several nonlinear
computational layers in a neural network being deep, RNNs are already deep, since any RNN can
be expressed as a composition of multiple nonlinear layers when unfolded in time.
Schmidhuber (1992); El Hihi and Bengio (1996) earlier proposed another way of building a deep
RNN by stacking multiple recurrent hidden states on top of each other. This approach poten-
tially allows the hidden state at each level to operate at different timescale (see, e.g., Hermans and
Schrauwen, 2013). Nonetheless, we notice that there are some other aspects of the model that may
still be considered shallow. For instance, the transition between two consecutive hidden states at
a single level is shallow, when viewed separately.This has implications on what kind of transitions
this model can represent as discussed in Section 3.2.3.
Based on this observation, in this paper, we investigate possible approaches to extending an RNN
into a deep RNN. We begin by studying which parts of an RNN may be considered shallow. Then,
1
arXiv:1312.6026v5  [cs.NE]  24 Apr 2014
for each shallow part, we propose an alternative deeper design, which leads to a number of deeper
variants of an RNN. The proposed deeper variants are then empirically evaluated on two sequence
modeling tasks.
The layout of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we brieﬂy introduce the concept of an RNN. In
Section 3 we explore different concepts of depth in RNNs. In particular, in Section 3.3.1–3.3.2 we
propose two novel variants of deep RNNs and evaluate them empirically in Section 5 on two tasks:
polyphonic music prediction (Boulanger-Lewandowskiet al., 2012) and language modeling. Finally
we discuss the shortcomings and advantages of the proposed models in Section 6.
2 Recurrent Neural Networks
A recurrent neural network (RNN) is a neural network that simulates a discrete-time dynamical
system that has an input xt, an output yt and a hidden state ht. In our notation the subscript t
represents time. The dynamical system is deﬁned by
ht =fh(xt, ht−1) (1)
yt =fo(ht), (2)
wherefh andfo are a state transition function and an output function, respectively. Each function is
parameterized by a set of parameters; θh and θo.
Given a set of N training sequences D =
{(
(x(n)
1 , y(n)
1 ),..., (x(n)
Tn, y(n)
Tn )
)}N
n=1
, the parameters
of an RNN can be estimated by minimizing the following cost function:
J(θ) = 1
N
N∑
n=1
Tn∑
t=1
d(y(n)
t ,f o(h(n)
t )), (3)
where h(n)
t =fh(x(n)
t , h(n)
t−1) and h(n)
0 = 0.d(a, b) is a predeﬁned divergence measure betweena
and b, such as Euclidean distance or cross-entropy.
2.1 Conventional Recurrent Neural Networks
A conventional RNN is constructed by deﬁning the transition function and the output function as
ht =fh(xt, ht−1) = φh
(
W⊤ht−1 + U⊤xt
)
(4)
yt =fo(ht, xt) = φo
(
V⊤ht
)
, (5)
where W, U and V are respectively the transition, input and output matrices, and φh andφo are
element-wise nonlinear functions. It is usual to use a saturating nonlinear function such as a logistic
sigmoid function or a hyperbolic tangent function for φh. An illustration of this RNN is in Fig. 2
(a).
The parameters of the conventional RNN can be estimated by, for instance, stochastic gradient de-
scent (SGD) algorithm with the gradient of the cost function in Eq. (3) computed by backpropagation
through time (Rumelhart et al., 1986).
3 Deep Recurrent Neural Networks
3.1 Why Deep Recurrent Neural Networks?
Deep learning is built around a hypothesis that a deep, hierarchical model can be exponentially
more efﬁcient at representing some functions than a shallow one (Bengio, 2009). A number of
recent theoretical results support this hypothesis (see, e.g., Le Roux and Bengio, 2010; Delalleau
and Bengio, 2011; Pascanu et al., 2013b). For instance, it has been shown by Delalleau and Bengio
(2011) that a deep sum-product network may require exponentially less units to represent the same
function compared to a shallow sum-product network. Furthermore, there is a wealth of empirical
evidences supporting this hypothesis (see, e.g., Goodfellow et al., 2013; Hinton et al., 2012b,a).
These ﬁndings make us suspect that the same argument should apply to recurrent neural networks.
2
3.2 Depth of a Recurrent Neural Network
yt-1
xt-1
ht-1
xt
ht
yt
xt+1
ht+1
yt+1
Figure 1: A conventional recurrent neural network unfolded in time.
The depth is deﬁned in the case of feedforward neural networks as having multiple nonlinear layers
between input and output. Unfortunately this deﬁnition does not apply trivially to a recurrent neural
network (RNN) because of its temporal structure. For instance, any RNN when unfolded in time as
in Fig. 1 is deep, because a computational path between the input at timek<t to the output at time
t crosses several nonlinear layers.
A close analysis of the computation carried out by an RNN (see Fig. 2 (a)) at each time step individ-
ually, however, shows that certain transitions are not deep, but are only results of a linear projection
followed by an element-wise nonlinearity. It is clear that the hidden-to-hidden (ht−1→ ht), hidden-
to-output (ht→ yt) and input-to-hidden (xt→ ht) functions are all shallow in the sense that there
exists no intermediate, nonlinear hidden layer.
We can now consider different types of depth of an RNN by considering those transitions separately.
We may make the hidden-to-hidden transition deeper by having one or more intermediate nonlinear
layers between two consecutive hidden states ( ht−1 and ht). At the same time, the hidden-to-
output function can be made deeper, as described previously, by plugging, multiple intermediate
nonlinear layers between the hidden state ht and the output yt. Each of these choices has a different
implication.
3.2.1 Deep Input-to-Hidden Function
A model can exploit more non-temporal structure from the input by making the input-to-hidden
function deep. Previous work has shown that higher-level representations of deep networks tend to
better disentangle the underlying factors of variation than the original input (Goodfellowet al., 2009;
Glorot et al., 2011b) and ﬂatten the manifolds near which the data concentrate (Bengio et al., 2013).
We hypothesize that such higher-level representations should make it easier to learn the temporal
structure between successive time steps because the relationship between abstract features can gen-
erally be expressed more easily. This has been, for instance, illustrated by the recent work (Mikolov
et al., 2013b) showing that word embeddings from neural language models tend to be related to their
temporal neighbors by simple algebraic relationships, with the same type of relationship (adding a
vector) holding over very different regions of the space, allowing a form of analogical reasoning.
This approach of making the input-to-hidden function deeper is in the line with the standard practice
of replacing input with extracted features in order to improve the performance of a machine learning
model (see, e.g., Bengio, 2009). Recently, Chen and Deng (2013) reported that a better speech
recognition performance could be achieved by employing this strategy, although they did not jointly
train the deep input-to-hidden function together with other parameters of an RNN.
3.2.2 Deep Hidden-to-Output Function
A deep hidden-to-output function can be useful to disentangle the factors of variations in the hidden
state, making it easier to predict the output. This allows the hidden state of the model to be more
compact and may result in the model being able to summarize the history of previous inputs more
efﬁciently. Let us denote an RNN with this deep hidden-to-output function a deep output RNN
(DO-RNN).
Instead of having feedforward, intermediate layers between the hidden state and the output,
Boulanger-Lewandowski et al. (2012) proposed to replace the output layer with a conditional gen-
3
xt
ht-1 ht
yt
xt
ht-1 ht
yt
xt
ht-1 ht
yt
xt
ht-1 ht
yt
xt
ht-1
ht
yt
z t-1
z t
(a) RNN (b) DT-RNN (b*) DT(S)-RNN (c) DOT-RNN (d) Stacked RNN
Figure 2: Illustrations of four different recurrent neural networks (RNN). (a) A conventional RNN.
(b) Deep Transition (DT) RNN. (b*) DT-RNN with shortcut connections (c) Deep Transition, Deep
Output (DOT) RNN. (d) Stacked RNN
erative model such as restricted Boltzmann machines or neural autoregressive distribution estima-
tor (Larochelle and Murray, 2011). In this paper we only consider feedforward intermediate layers.
3.2.3 Deep Hidden-to-Hidden Transition
The third knob we can play with is the depth of the hidden-to-hidden transition. The state transition
between the consecutive hidden states effectively adds a new input to the summary of the previous
inputs represented by the ﬁxed-length hidden state. Previous work with RNNs has generally limited
the architecture to a shallow operation; afﬁne transformation followed by an element-wise nonlin-
earity. Instead, we argue that this procedure of constructing a new summary, or a hidden state, from
the combination of the previous one and the new input should be highly nonlinear. This nonlinear
transition could allow, for instance, the hidden state of an RNN to rapidly adapt to quickly changing
modes of the input, while still preserving a useful summary of the past. This may be impossible to
be modeled by a function from the family of generalized linear models. However, this highly non-
linear transition can be modeled by an MLP with one or more hidden layers which has an universal
approximator property (see, e.g., Hornik et al., 1989).
An RNN with this deep transition will be called a deep transition RNN (DT-RNN) throughout re-
mainder of this paper. This model is shown in Fig. 2 (b).
This approach of having a deep transition, however, introduces a potential problem. As the in-
troduction of deep transition increases the number of nonlinear steps the gradient has to traverse
when propagated back in time, it might become more difﬁcult to train the model to capture long-
term dependencies (Bengio et al., 1994). One possible way to address this difﬁculty is to introduce
shortcut connections (see, e.g., Ra