Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently gained
widespread attention as a successful tool for analyzing graph-
structured data. However, imperfect graph structure with
noisy links lacks enough robustness and may damage graph
representations, therefore limiting the GNNs’ performance in
practical tasks. Moreover, existing generative architectures
fail to fit discriminative graph-related tasks. To tackle these
issues, we introduce an unsupervised method based on a joint
of generative training and discriminative training to learn
graph structure and representation, aiming to improve the
discriminative performance of generative models. We pro-
pose an Energy-based Contrastive Learning (ECL) guided
Graph Structure Refinement (GSR) framework, denoted as
ECL-GSR. To our knowledge, this is the first work to com-
bine energy-based models with contrastive learning for GSR.
Specifically, we leverage ECL to approximate the joint dis-
tribution of sample pairs, which increases the similarity be-
tween representations of positive pairs while reducing the
similarity between negative ones. Refined structure is pro-
duced by augmenting and removing edges according to the
similarity metrics among node representations. Extensive ex-
periments demonstrate that ECL-GSR outperforms the state-
of-the-art on eight benchmark datasets in node classification.
ECL-GSR achieves faster training with fewer samples and
memories against the leading baseline, highlighting its sim-
plicity and efficiency in downstream tasks.
Introduction
With the explosive growth of graph-structured data, Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) (Zhu et al. 2019; Zhang and Zitnik
2020; Zhang et al. 2019a; Xu et al. 2018) have emerged as
a potent deep learning tool, experiencing notable advance-
ments across diverse applications, such as node classifica-
tion (Veliˇckovi´c et al. 2017; Kipf and Welling 2016), node
clustering (Wang et al. 2019a; Zhang et al. 2019b), graph
classification (Duvenaud et al. 2015; Lee, Lee, and Kang
2019), link prediction (Peng et al. 2020; Srinivasan and
Ribeiro 2019), recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2019b;
Yu et al. 2021b), drug discovery (Wang et al. 2021b), and
anomaly detection (Ding et al. 2019). GNNs usually adopt
a message-passing scheme (Gilmer et al. 2017), aggregat-
ing information from neighboring nodes within the observed
topology to compute graph representations. The strong rep-
resentational capacity of most GNNs hinges on the assump-
tion that graph structure is sufficiently reliable and perfectly
noise-free (Szegedy et al. 2013), considered as ground-truth
information for model training. However, this assumption
may hardly hold in real-world applications. This is due to
the fact: i) Raw structure is typically derived from com-
plex interactive systems, leading to inherent uncertainties
and incomplete connections. Even worse, the GNN itera-
tive mechanism with cascading effects repeatedly aggregates
neighborhood features. Minor noises in the graph can prop-
agate to adjacent nodes, influencing other node embeddings
and potentially introducing further inaccuracies (Dai et al.
2018). ii) Graph representation containing explicit structure
is not informative enough to improve task performance. Raw
topology only incorporates necessary physical connections,
such as chemical bonds in molecules, and fails to capture
abstract or implicit links among nodes. Furthermore, in var-
ious graph-related tasks, such as text graph in natural lan-
guage processing (Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019) or scene graph
for images in computer vision (Suhail et al. 2021), the ex-
plicit structure may either be absent or unavailable.
To tackle these challenges mentioned above, Graph Struc-
ture Refinement (GSR) involves learning invariant under-
lying relationships by extracting general knowledge from
graph data, rather than relying solely on task-specific infor-
mation. Therefore, the primary concern of GSR lies in graph
representation learning, which can be broadly classified into
two categories (Wang et al. 2018a). On one hand, graph gen-
erative models (Grover and Leskovec 2016; Dong, Chawla,
and Swami 2017; Zheng et al. 2020) assume that each
node follows an inherent connectivity distribution. Edges
are viewed as samples from these distributions, with the
models enhancing node representations by optimizing the
likelihood of these observed edges. However, most down-
stream tasks are inherently discriminative, such as node clas-
sification and graph prediction. The state-of-the-art genera-
tive models have significantly deviated from discriminative
architectures (Grathwohl et al. 2020). On the other hand,
discriminative models (Veliˇckovi´c et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2018b; Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020) focus on learning
a classifier to predict the presence of edges directly. They
output a single scalar to represent the probability between
node pair, thereby differentiating the connectivity of edges.
Nonetheless, these models may suffer from overfitting to
the training data, capturing noise instead of extracting la-
arXiv:2412.17856v3  [cs.LG]  24 Mar 2025
tent useful features, as well as lack the ability to generalize
across different datasets and diverse graph structures. Re-
cently, (Wang et al. 2022b) and (Kim and Ye 2022) establish
a crucial connection between discriminative paradigms and
Energy-based Models (EBMs) (LeCun et al. 2006), creat-
ing a unified framework to generate higher-quality samples
and better visual representations. Motivated by these find-
ings, we advocate for incorporating EBMs and Contrastive
Learning (CL) to unlock the potential of generative mod-
els in addressing discriminative problems of graph-related
tasks.
In this paper, we explore a novel Energy-based Con-
trastive Learning (ECL) approach to guide the GSR frame-
work, termed ECL-GSR, which integrates EBMs with CL
for unsupervised graph representation learning. Specifically,
ECL complements discriminative training loss with gener-
ative loss, supplying higher quality and more robust repre-
sentations for downstream tasks. Theoretically, we demon-
strate that the existing discriminative loss is merely a spe-
cific instance of the ECL loss when the generative term is
disabled. Empirically, ECL can be interpreted as maximiz-
ing the joint log-likelihood of the similarity between positive
sample pairs with EBMs and minimizing the similarity be-
tween negative ones with CL, indicating the augmentations
of identical and different samples, respectively. In GSR, we
perform edge prediction by adding or removing links based
on the similarity probabilities among node representations,
further refining the raw structure. Finally, we evaluate ECL-
GSR on the node classification task using the refined graph.
The major contributions are threefold as follows:
• We present a novel ECL-GSR framework for joint graph
structure and representation learning. It is the first work to
combine EBMs with CL as generative and discriminative
paradigms for GSR.
• Contrary to most GSR methods, ECL-GSR is a straight-
forward implementation, demanding fewer training itera-
tions, memory costs, and data samples to obtain the equiv-
alent or better performance.
• Extensive experiments on eight benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of ECL-GSR over current
state-of-the-art methods. Ablation studies further confirm
its effectiveness, efficiency, and robustness.
Background
Graph Structure Refinement
Given a raw graph G = ( V, E, X) = ( A, X) with noisy
topology, where V is the set of V = |V| nodes, E is the set
of M = |E| edges, X ∈ RV ×D is the node feature matrix
(the ith entry xi ∈ RD represents the attribute of node vi),
and A ∈ RV ×V is the adjacency matrix (Ai,j > 0 indicates
ei,j = (vi, vj), i, j ∈ M). The target of graph structure re-
finement (Zhu et al. 2021) is to acquire a refined graph eG
with a clean adjacency eA, along with corresponding repre-
sentation eZ ∈ RV × eF , eF ≪ D, for downstream tasks.
Energy-based Models
Given a point χ sampled from the data distribution pd(χ),
EBMs assign a scalar-valued energy function Eθ(χ) ∈ R
by a DNN with parameters θ. The energy function define
a probability distribution using the Boltzmann distribution
pθ(χ) = exp(−Eθ(χ))
Z(θ) , where Z(θ) is a normalizing constant
or partition function ensuringpθ integrates to 1. EBMs lever-
age the defined distributionpθ to model the data distribution
pd by minimizing the negative log-likelihood ofpθ under pd,
as indicated by:
min
θ
Eχ∼pd [− log pθ(χ)]. (1)
The derivative of the negative log-likelihoodL(θ) is:
∇θL(θ) ∼= Eχ+∼pd [∇θEθ(χ+)] − Eχ−∼pθ [∇θEθ(χ−)] .
(2)
Eq. 2 decreases the energy values of positive samples
χ+ while increasing those of negative ones χ− (Hinton
2002). However, computing Z(θ) for most parameteriza-
tions of Eθ(χ) is intractable. We employ Stochastic Gradi-
ent Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) (Welling and Teh 2011) de-
rived from Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to
reduce the mixing time of sampling procedure. Specifically,
it generates pθ as an approximation of pd via iteratively up-
dating χ, denoted as:
χk+1 = χk − λ
2 ∇χEθ(χk) + ωk , (3)
where ωk ∼ N (0, λ). As k → ∞ and λ → 0, then pθ con-
verges to pd. This process generates data samples through
the energy function implicitly rather than explicitly.
Contrastive Learning
Given a set of random variables {χn}N
n=1, we define a
data augmentation T to generate two distinct views νn =
t(χn), ν′
n = t′(χn), i.e., t, t′ ∼ T . CL constitutes an un-
supervised framework for representation learning, aiming to
maximize the mutual information I between the represen-
tations of two views νn and ν′
m w.r.t the joint distribution
p(νn, ν ′
m). This is expressed as:
max
Dθ
I(zn, z ′
m) , (4)
where zn = Dθ(νn) is the representation and Dθ(•) is a
parametric DNN. When n = m, the views (νn, ν′
m) are re-
ferred to as a positive pair with the same marginal distri-
bution. Conversely, they are called a negative pair. In prac-
tice, each pair provides supervisory information to the other,
playing a role similar to that of labels in a supervised man-
ner. CL trains Dθ to encourage zn and its positive pair z′
n to
be close in the projection space while pushing away repre-
sentations of all negative pairs z′
m. This principle has been
proven to be key in boosting performance (Chen et al. 2020).
Methodology
In this section, we delineate the proposed ECL-GSR frame-
work. As shown in Fig. 1, our pipeline consists of four steps:
Figure 1: Illustration of the procedure of ECL-GSR. Preprocessed dual-attribute graph undergoes data augmentations, energy-
based contrastive learning, and edge prediction, achieving structure refinement. Refined graph is applied in node classification.
preprocessing, energy-based contrastive learning, edge pre-
diction, and node classification. Initially, we construct a
dual-attribute graph by extracting contextual and structural
information and acquiring subgraphs as input through edge
sampling. Then, the ECL approach is introduced with the
theorem and implementation. Next, we fine-tune the graph
structure and evaluate the node classification task with raw
features. Lastly, we present the final training objective.
Preprocessing
Dual-attribute graph Our framework can make full use
of all trustworthy observations to maximize informative-
ness by constructing a dual-attribute graph. We concate-
nate the contextual information X c, and structural embed-
ding X s as a new attribute, where X c is derived directly
from the raw node features and X s is extracted using the
DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014). Finally, the
dual-attribute graph is represented as G† = ( X †, A), where
X † = [X c, Xs] is the new node features.
Edge sampling To address memory limitations, neigh-
bor sampling techniques enable stochastic training on large
graphs G by decomposing them into smaller subgraphs
g. Each subgraph sequentially contributes to GNNs’ opti-
mization, executing multiple gradient descent steps within 