ABSTRACT
Humans and intelligent animals can internalize new information and accurately
internalize their implications to perform downstream tasks. While large language
models (LLMs) can achieve this through in-context learning (ICL) when the infor-
mation (news) is explicitly given as context, adequately integrating the information
into model weights via fine-tuning remains challenging. In this paper, we intro-
duceNew News, a dataset composed of hypothetical yet plausible news spanning
multiple domains (mathematics, coding, discoveries, leaderboards, events), ac-
companied by downstream evaluation questions whose correct answers critically
depend on understanding and internalizing the news. First, we demonstrate a
substantial gap between naive fine-tuning and in-context learning (FT-ICL gap) on
our dataset. To address this gap, we explore a suite of self-play data generation
protocols — paraphrases, implications, and Self-QA — designed to
distill the knowledge processed by the model with context into the weights of the
model, which we termSystem-2 Fine-tuning(Sys2-FT). We systematically evaluate
ICL and Sys2-FT performance across data domains and model scales with the
Qwen 2.5 family of models. Our results demonstrate that the Self-QA protocol
of Sys2-FT significantly improves models’ in-weight learning of the news while
preserving general capabilities. Furthermore, we discover thecontextual shadow-
ing effect, where training with the newsin contextfollowed by its rephrases or
QAs catastrophically degrades learning of the news. Finally, we show preliminary
evidence of an emerging scaling law of Sys2-FT.
1 INTRODUCTION
Learningnewknowledge in a consistent and continuous way is one of the most important cognitive
abilities. While large language models (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2024a; Team, 2024b; Dubey
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024) have been successful in crushing knowledge and problem-solving
focused benchmarks (Hendrycks et al., 2021a;b; Rein et al., 2023), these benchmarks do not measure
the ability to successfully adapt one’s belief when internalizing new information, which is arguably a
hallmark of general intelligence. Interestingly, current models demonstrate impressive in-context
learning abilities and can process novel information efficiently when the new information is given in
context (Wei et al., 2023; Team, 2024a; Lampinen et al., 2022; Park et al., 2024); yet, it remains a
challenge to consolidate the knowledge in weights (Snell et al., 2022; Berglund et al., 2024; Guan
et al., 2025). For example, upon learning the news that Trump won the 2024 US election, most people
can instinctively update their world models, propagate implications and react accordingly. Given such
news as context, language models are able to process its implication adequately as well through its
chain of thoughts; however, it is hard to distill these implications back into its weights via fine-tuning
∗Equal Contribution
1
arXiv:2505.01812v3  [cs.CL]  14 Nov 2025
Preprint
(FT), as past works have shown the unreliability of fine-tuning as a knowledge injection technique
(Mitchell et al., 2022a; Meng et al., 2022; Berglund et al., 2024).
In this paper, we aim to set up the groundwork to systematically study integration of new information
(“news”) into large language model weights.
Our main contributions are as follows:
1. New News, a dataset measuring the ability to integrate new information (Sec. 3). We
carefully curateNew News, a dataset consisting of 75 hypothetical news and 375 downstream
questions across 5 different domains: math, coding, discoveries, leaderboards and events.
The questions measure how well the given news is internalized by evaluating complex
downstreamimplications and consequences. This dataset clearly characterizes the gap
between the naive FT and ICL across model scales.