Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) can spend ex-
tra compute during inference to generate in-
termediate thoughts, which helps to produce
better final responses. Since Chain-of-Thought
(Wei et al., 2022), many such System 2 tech-
niques have been proposed such as Rephrase
and Respond (Deng et al., 2023a), System 2
Attention (Weston and Sukhbaatar, 2023) and
Branch-Solve-Merge (Saha et al., 2023). In
this work we investigate self-supervised meth-
ods to “compile” (distill) higher quality outputs
from System 2 techniques back into LLM gen-
erations without intermediate reasoning token
sequences, as this reasoning has been distilled
into System 1. We show that several such tech-
niques can be successfully distilled, resulting
in improved results compared to the original
System 1 performance, and with less inference
cost than System 2. We posit that System 2 dis-
tillation will be an important feature of future
continually learning AI systems, enabling them
to focus System 2 capabilities on the reasoning
tasks that they cannot yet do well.
1 Introduction
Generating intermediate thoughts allows a model
(or human!) to reason and plan in order to success-
fully complete a task or respond to an instruction.
We refer to such deliberate thinking as System 2
reasoning, following its description for humans in
Sloman (1996); Kahneman (2011) and later for AI
models (Bengio, 2017; LeCun, 2022; Weston and
Sukhbaatar, 2023). In System 2 reasoning effortful
mental activity is exerted, especially in situations
where System 1 – more automatic thinking – is
likely to make errors. In standard Large Language
Models (LLMs) we thus define System 1 as appli-
cation of the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) to
directly produce a response given an input, with-
out generation of intermediate tokens. We define
System 2 as any approach which generates inter-
mediate tokens, including methods that perform
Distillation 
Training data
Distilled 
System 2 Model
Filtering
System 2
Output
CoT
RaR
rephrase respondS2A
re-write answerBSM
branch solve merge
System 2 Methods
Supervised 
Finetuning
Input
LLM 
program
Figure 1: Overview of System 2 Distillation. Filtered train-
ing examples are collected by running System 2 approaches
such as Branch-Solve-Merge (BSM) on unlabeled data, which
uses extra compute to produce higher quality outputs. These
targets are then distilled into the standard (System 1) LLM.
search, or prompt multiple times, before finally
generating a response. A battery of such System 2
techniques have been proposed, among them Chain-
of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022), Tree-of-Thoughts
(Yao et al., 2024), Graph-of-Thoughts (Besta et al.,
2024), Branch-Solve-Merge (Saha et al., 2023),
System 2 Attention (Weston and Sukhbaatar, 2023),
Rephrase and Respond (Deng et al., 2023a) and
more. Many of these methods are shown to produce
more accurate results due to this explicit reasoning,
but typically do so at much higher inference cost
and latency for a response. Due to the latter, many
of these approaches are not used in production sys-
tems, which mostly use System 1 generations.
For a human, the process of learning to trans-
fer a skill from deliberate (System 2) to automatic
(System 1) in psychology is referred to as auto-
maticity, and the use ofprocedural memory (Cohen
and Squire, 1980). For example, when driving to
work for the first time one might typically expend
conscious effort planning and making decisions
to get there. After a driver repeats this route, the
1
arXiv:2407.06023v3  [cs.CL]  24 Jul 2024
driving process becomes “compiled” into the sub-
conscious (Charlton and Starkey, 2013). Similarly,
playing a sport such as tennis can become “second
nature”. In this work, we explore an analogous
technique for AI models. Our approach performs
this compilation, which we refer to as System 2
distillation, in an unsupervised manner given a set
of unlabeled examples. For each example we apply
the given System 2 method, and then measure the
quality of the prediction in an unsupervised manner.
For example, for tasks with unique answers we ap-
ply self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022), sampling
multiple times. For examples where System 2 is
consistent enough, we assume this result should
be distilled, and add it to the distillation pool. We
then fine-tune System 1 to match the predictions
of the System 2 method on the collected pool of
examples, but without generating the intermediate
steps. Figure 1 illustrates the overall process of
distilling System 2 into System 1.
We conduct experiments across 4 different Sys-
tem 2 LLM approaches and 5 different tasks. We
find our approach can distill System 2 reasoning
into System 1 in a diverse array of settings, some-
times even improving the results over the System 2
teacher. Moreover, these predictions are now pro-
duced at a fraction of the computational cost. For
example, we see successful distillation for tasks
involving dealing with biased opinions or irrele-
vant information (System 2 Attention), clarifying
and improving responses in some reasoning tasks
(Rephrase and Respond), and for fine-grained eval-
uation of LLMs (Branch-Solve-Merge). However,
we also show that not all tasks can be distilled into
System 1, particularly complex math reasoning
tasks requiring chain-of-thought. This is also mir-
rored in humans, who cannot execute some tasks
without deliberate System 2 reasoning (Kahneman,
2011).
2 Related work
2.1 System 1 and System 2 in Humans
In humans, System 1 reasoning is described as be-
ing capable of recognizing patterns, making quick
judgments, and understanding simple or familiar
symbols. For instance, it is used to identify com-
mon traffic signs, recognize faces, or associate ba-
sic symbols with specific emotions or ideas. How-
ever, for complex problem-solving or for example
manipulation of abstract symbols (like algebraic
equations or logical statements), System 2 reason-
ing is deemed necessary (Kahneman, 2011). In psy-
chology the concept of automaticity describes be-
havior that becomes so well-practiced that it can be
performed with little to no conscious thought, with
an example being driving a familiar route (Charlton
and Starkey, 2013). In general, humans are said
to use procedural memory to consolidate a specific
task into memory, learning through practice, so that
it can be later performed without conscious aware-
ness (Cohen and Squire, 1980). The concept of un-
conscious competence is classified as a later stage
of learning. Initially a person recognizes their in-
competence, and consciously seeks to learn a skill
until they acquire conscious competence. Finally,
the aim is to utilize it without conscious thought
when it is said to become, in common language,
“second nature” (DePhillips et al., 1960).
2.2 System 1 and System 2 Models
We refer to a neural network that outputs a response
directly without intermediate outputs as a System
1 model. Such a network can nevertheless com-
pute intermediate latent representations in its lay-
ers before it outputs a response. As these states are
represented as vectors they typically encode dis-
tributed knowledge, rather than discrete decisions,
and have difficulty manipulating complex symbolic
reasoning tasks directly (Nye et al., 2021; Cobbe
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), which
is analogous to issues with System 1 reasoning in
humans. Nevertheless, a vast array of tasks can be
solved with success directly in this manner without
intermediate generations (Radford et al., 2019).
Nye et al. (2021) showed that the same language
model that is unable to perform complex multi-step
computations can perform those tasks when asked
to generate intermediate steps into a “scratchpad”
using either few-shot prompting or supervised train-
ing. Chain-of-thought reasoning was shown to be
elicited from LLMs even using zero-shot prompt-
ing (Kojima et al., 2022) as well as by supervised
(Cobbe et al., 2021) or few-shot (Wei et al., 2022)
methods. LLM pretraining allows such reasoning
to be built into the model because reasoning steps
in discrete symbols (text) are present in the train-
ing corpora written by humans. Such System 2
model approaches output discrete tokens which is
good for making sequential correct logical reason-
ing steps – but obviously has a downside if the
reasoning is generated incorrectly. An incorrect
discrete decision is difficult to recover from, un-
like latent vector-based reasoning that might more
2
easily model a distribution.
Recently, many approaches have been proposed
to execute deeper reasoning using the LLM as part
of an inner loop where it generates intermediate
outputs, sometimes referred to as LLM Programs
(Schlag et al., 2023). These include subquestion
decomposition (Perez et al., 2020), self-refinement
(Madaan et al., 2024; Weston and Sukhbaatar,
2023; Deng et al., 2023a), self-verification and ask-
ing (Press et al., 2022; Weng et al., 2022; Dhuli-
awala et al., 2023), and various search techniques
such as Tree-of-Thoughts and others (Yao et al.,
2024; Besta et al., 2024).
2.3 (Standard) Distillation
The concept of distillation is usually applied to tak-
ing separate models, a powerful teacher model (or
multiple teacher models) and a less powerful stu-
dent model with separate parameters. The student
model is then trained to mimic the behavior of the
teacher(s). Methods of distillation include training
the student to have similar output distributions (Hin-
ton et al., 2015), layer activations (Adriana et al.,
2015) or derivatives of the target teacher outputs
(Czarnecki et al., 2017). Earlier works considered
distillation from an ensemble of multiple teacher
models (Buciluˇa et al., 2006; Hinton et al., 2015).
As neural networks have become larger, distilling
from a larger to a smaller network has become a
common paradigm (Ba and Caruana, 2014). In con-
trast, in our work the teacher and student model are
the same language model, but applied differently
(either with intermediate reasoning, or not).
For chain-of-thought reasoning in particular, sev-
eral distillation approaches have been considered
(Wang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Chen et al.,
2024). These again follow the paradigm of distill-
ing a separate larger model’s output into a smaller
model, i.e. the student model is asked to mimic the
internal thoughts of the teacher model. The work
of Zhang et al. (2024), however, considers distill-
ing a slower System 2 method (Tree-of-Thought)
into a faster System 2 method (CoT), which can
use the same model as student and teacher. In con-
trast our work’s goal is to not generate internal
thoughts (to improve System 1). Some exceptions
are Deng et al. (2023b, 2024). The former still uses
a separate student and teacher model, but attempts
to distill the intermediate thought tokens into the
layers of the network by representing reasoning
steps as vectors and then setting them as targets.
The latter recent work attempts to distill CoT by
gradually removing the intermediate steps, which
can improve performance greatly compared to not
doing so, but still does not match explicit CoT.
3 Distilling System 2 into System 1
3.1 Setup: System 1 and System 2 models
Given an input x, in this work we consider the
setting of a single model, in our case a large lan-
guage model (LLM), that is capable of two modes
of response:
(i) System 1: Produces the output y directly. This
is done by forwarding through the layers of
the underlying autoregressive neural network
(Transformer) to produce the output tokens.
(ii) System 2 : We define System 2 models as
methods that use the underlying Transformer
to generate intermediate output tokens z of
any kind before generating the final response
tokens. This may include multiple calls
(prompts).
More formally, we consider a System 2 model
SII as a function that takes an LLM pθ and input x,
and can call the LLM possibly repeatedly to gener-
ate intermediate tokens z using a specific algorithm,
before returning an output y:
