Abstract
Maximum likelihood estimation of energy-based models is a challenging problem
due to the intractability of the log-likelihood gradient. In this work, we propose
learning both the energy function and an amortized approximate sampling mecha-
nism using a neural generator network, which provides an efﬁcient approximation
of the log-likelihood gradient. The resulting objective requires maximizing entropy
of the generated samples, which we perform using recently proposed nonparametric
mutual information estimators. Finally, to stabilize the resulting adversarial game,
we use a zero-centered gradient penalty derived as a necessary condition from the
score matching literature. The proposed technique can generate sharp images with
Inception and FID scores competitive with recent GAN techniques, does not suffer
from mode collapse, and is competitive with state-of-the-art anomaly detection
techniques.
1 Introduction
Unsupervised learning promises to take advantage from unlabelled data, and is regarded as crucial
for artiﬁcial intelligence (Lake et al., 2017). Energy-based modeling (EBMs, LeCun et al. (2006))
is a family of unsupervised learning methods focused on learning an energy function, i.e., an
unnormalized log density of the data. This removes the need to make parametric assumptions about
the data distribution to make the normalizing constant ( Z) tractable. However, in practice, due
to the very same lack of restrictions, learning high-quality energy-based models is fraught with
challenges. To avoid explicitly computing Z or its gradient, Contrastive Divergence (Hinton, 2000)
and Stochastic Maximum Likelihood (Younes, 1998; Tieleman, 2008a) rely on Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) to approximately sample from the energy-based model. However, MCMC-based
sampling approaches frequently suffer from long mixing times for high-dimensional data. Thus,
training of energy-based models has not remained competitive with other unsupervised learning
techniques such as variational auto-encoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and generative adversarial
networks or GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
In this work, we propose Maximum Entropy Generators (MEG), a framework in which we train
both an energy function and an approximate sampler, which can either be fast (using a generator
network G) or uses G to initialize a Markov chain in the latent space of the generator. Training such
a generator properly requires entropy maximization of the generator’s output distribution, for which
we take advantage of recent advances in nonparametric mutual information maximization (Belghazi
et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2018; Oord et al., 2018; Poole et al., 2018).
∗Correspondence to rithesh.kumar@umontreal.ca
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:1901.08508v2  [cs.LG]  27 May 2019
xdata xmodel
ℒEBM
Eθ Eθ
MCMC xdata xmodel
ℒEBM
Eθ Eθ
zGω
Figure 1 – Left: Traditional maximum likelihood training of energy-based models. Right: Training
of maximum entropy generators for energy-based models
To evaluate the efﬁcacy of the proposed technique, we compare against other state-of-the-art tech-
niques on image generation, accurate mode representation, and anomaly detection. We demonstrate
that the proposed technique is able to generate CIFAR-10 samples which are competitive with
WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017) according to the Fréchet Inception Distance (Heusel et al., 2017)
and Inception Score (Salimans et al., 2016), and is able to generate samples of all the 104 modes of
4-StackedMNIST at the correct data frequencies.
We demonstrate that our technique trains energy functions useful for anomaly detection on the
KDD99 dataset, and that it performs as well as state-of-the-art anomaly detection techniques which
were specially designed for the task, and vastly outperform other energy-based and generative models
for anomaly detection.
To summarize our contributions, we propose maximum entropy generators (MEG), a novel frame-
work for training energy-based models using amortized neural generators and mutual information
maximization. We show that the resulting energy function can be successfully used for anomaly
detection, and outperforms recently published results with energy-based models. We show that MEG
generates sharp images – with competitive Inception and FID scores – and accurately captures more
modes than standard GANs, while not suffering from the common mode-mixing issue of many
maximum likelihood generative models which results in blurry samples.
2 Background
Let x denote a sample in the data spaceX and Eθ :X→ R an energy function corresponding to the
negative logarithm of an unnormalized estimated density density function
pθ(x) = e−Eθ(x)
Zθ
∝ e−Eθ(x) (1)
where Zθ :=
∫
e−Eθ (x)dx is the normalizing constant or partition function. Let pD be the training
distribution, from which the training set is drawn. Towards optimizing the parameters θ of the energy
function, the maximum likelihood parameter gradient is
∂Ex∼pD [− log pθ(x)]
∂θ = Ex∼pD
[ ∂Eθ(x)
∂θ
]
− Ex∼pθ(x)
[ ∂Eθ(x)
∂θ
]
(2)
where the second term is the gradient of log Zθ, and the sum of the two expectations is zero
when training has converged, with expected energy gradients in the positive phase (under the data
pD) matching those under the negative phase (under pθ(x)). Training thus consists in trying to
separate two distributions: the positive phase distribution (associated with the data) and the negative
phase distribution (where the model is free-running and generating conﬁgurations by itself). This
observation has motivated the pre-GAN idea presented by Bengio (2009) that “model samples are
negative examples" and a classiﬁer could be used to learn an energy function if it separated the data
distribution from the model’s own samples. Shortly after introducing GANs, Goodfellow (2014) also
made a similar connection, related to noise-contrastive estimation (Gutmann & Hyvarinen, 2010).
One should also recognize the similarity between Eq. 2 and the objective function for Wasserstein
GANs or WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017).
The main challenge in Eq. 2 is to obtain samples from the distribution pθ associated with the energy
function Eθ. Although having an energy function is convenient to obtain a score allowing comparison
2
of the relative probability for differentx’s, it is difﬁcult to convert an energy function into a generative
process. The commonly studied approaches for this are based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo, in which
one iteratively updates a candidate conﬁguration, until these conﬁgurations converge in distribution to
the desired distribution pθ. For the RBM, the most commonly used algorithms have been Contrastive
Divergence (Hinton, 2000) and Stochastic Maximum Likelihood (Younes, 1998; Tieleman, 2008a),
relying on the particular structure of the RBM to perform Gibbs sampling. Although these MCMC-
based methods are appealing, RBMs (and their deeper form, the deep Boltzmann machine) have
not been competitive in recent years compared to autoregressive models (van den Oord et al.,
2016), variational auto-encoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and generative adversarial networks or
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
What has been hypothesized as a reason for poorer results obtained with energy-based models trained
with an MCMC estimator for the negative phase gradient is that running a Markov chain in data space
is fundamentally difﬁcult when the distribution is concentrated (e.g, near manifolds) and has many
modes separated by vast areas of low probability. This mixing challenge is discussed by Bengio
et al. (2013) who argue that a Markov chain is very likely to produce only sequences of highly
probable conﬁgurations: if two modes are far from each other and only local moves are possible
(which is typically the case when performing MCMC), it becomes exponentially unlikely to traverse
the “desert” of low probability that can separate two modes. This makes mixing between modes
difﬁcult in high-dimensional spaces with strong concentration of probability mass in some regions
(e.g. corresponding to different categories) and very low probability elsewhere.
3 Maximum Entropy Generators for Energy-Based Models
We thus propose using an amortized neural sampler to perform fast approximate sampling to train the
energy model. We begin by replacing the model distribution pθ in in Eq. 2 by a neural generator G
parametrized by w. We deﬁnePG as the distribution of the outputs G(z) for z∼ pz where pz is a
simple prior distribution such as a standard Normal distribution.
∂LE
∂θ = Ex∼pD
[ ∂Eθ(x)
∂θ
]
− Ex∼pG(x)
[ ∂Eθ(x)
∂θ
]
(3)
To minimize the approximation error, pG must be close to pθ. To do so, we tune G to minimize
the KL divergence KL(pG||pθ), which can be rewritten in terms of minimizing the energy of the
samples from the generator while maximizing the entropy at the output of the generator:
KL(pG||pθ) =−H[pG]− EpG [log pθ(x)] (4)
=−H[pG] + EpG [Eθ(x)] + log Zθ (5)
When taking the gradient of KL(pG||pθ) with respect to the parameters w of the generator, the
log-partition function log Zθ disappears and we can optimize w by minimizing
LG =−H[pG] + Ez∼pz Eθ(G(z)) (6)
where pz is the prior distribution of the latent variable of the generator.
In order to approximately maximize the entropy H[pG] at the output of the generator, we use one
recently proposed nonparametric mutual information maximization techniques (Belghazi et al., 2018;
Oord et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2018). Poole et al. (2018) show that these techniques can be uniﬁed
into a single framework derived from the variational bound of Barber & Agakov (2003). Since the
generator is deterministic, mutual information between inputs and outputs reduces to simply entropy
of the outputs, since the conditional entropy of a deterministic function is zero:
I(X, Z) = H(X)− H(X|Z) = H(G(Z))− :0
H(G(Z)|Z)
In particular, we use the estimator from Hjelm et al. (2018), which estimates the Jensen-Shannon
divergence between the joint distribution (p(x, z)) and the product of marginals (p(x)p(z)). We refer
to this information measure as IJSD (X, Z). We found that the JSD-based estimator works better in
practice than the KL-based estimator (which corresponds to the mutual information).
The estimator of Hjelm et al. (2018) is given by
IJSD (X, Z) = sup
T∈T
Ep(X,Z)[−sp(−T (X, Z))]− Ep(X)p(Z)[sp(T (X, Z))] (7)
3
where sp(a) = log(1 + ea) is the softplus function. The supremum is approximated using gradient
descent on the parameters of the discriminator T .
With X = G(Z) the output of the generator,IJSD (G(Z), Z) is one of the terms to be maximized in
the objective function for trainingG, which would maximize the generator’s output entropyH(G(Z)).
Thus the ﬁnal training objective to be minimized for the generator G and the energy func-
tion E is
LG =−IJSD (G(Z), Z) + Ez∼pz Eθ(G(z)) (8)
LE = Ex∼pD Eθ(x)− Ez∼pz Eθ(G(z)) (9)
where Z∼ pz, the latent prior (typically a N (0, I) Gaussian).
3.1 Improving training stability
As can be seen from the above equations, the generator and the energy function are in an adversarial
game, similar to generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014). This makes optimization
via simultaneous gradient descent challenging since the gradient vector ﬁeld of such an optimization
problem is non-conservative as noted by Mescheder et al. (2017). This is particularly accentuated by
the use of deep neural networks for the generator and the energy function. In particular, we noticed
that during training the magnitude of the energy function values would diverge.
To help alleviate this issue we look towards another technique for learning energy-based models
called score matching proposed by Hyvärinen (2005). Score matching estimates the energy function
by matching the score functions of the data density and the model density, where the score function
ψ is the gradient of the log density with respect to the sample ψ(x) = ∂ logp(x)
∂x . If ψD(x) and
ψE(x) are the score functions under the data distribution and model dis