Abstract
Intermediate task ﬁne-tuning has been shown
to culminate in large transfer gains across
many NLP tasks. With an abundance of can-
didate datasets as well as pre-trained language
models, it has become infeasible to experiment
with all combinations to ﬁnd the best transfer
setting. In this work, we provide a compre-
hensive comparison of different methods for
efﬁciently identifying beneﬁcial tasks for inter-
mediate transfer learning. We focus on param-
eter and computationally efﬁcient adapter set-
tings, highlight different data-availability sce-
narios, and provide expense estimates for each
method. We experiment with a diverse set
of 42 intermediate and 11 target English clas-
siﬁcation, multiple choice, question answer-
ing, and sequence tagging tasks. Our results
demonstrate that efﬁcient embedding based
methods, which rely solely on the respective
datasets, outperform computational expensive
few-shot ﬁne-tuning approaches. Our best
methods achieve an average Regret@3 of 1%
across all target tasks, demonstrating that we
are able to efﬁciently identify the best datasets
for intermediate training. 1
1 Introduction
Large pre-trained language models (LMs) are con-
tinuously pushing the state of the art across various
NLP tasks. The established procedure performs
self-supervised pre-training on a large text corpus
and subsequently ﬁne-tunes the model on a spe-
ciﬁc target task (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019b). The same procedure has also been ap-
plied to adapter-based training strategies, which
achieve on-par task performance to full model
ﬁne-tuning while being considerably more param-
eter efﬁcient (Houlsby et al., 2019) and faster to
∗Contributions made prior to joining Amazon.
1Code released at https://github.com/
Adapter-Hub/efficient-task-transfer .
train (Rücklé et al., 2021).2 Besides being more ef-
ﬁcient, adapters are also highly modular, enabling
a wider range of transfer learning techniques (Pfeif-
fer et al., 2020b, 2021a,b; Üstün et al., 2020; Vidoni
et al., 2020; Rust et al., 2021; Ansell et al., 2021).
Extending upon the established two-step learn-
ing procedure, incorporating intermediate stages of
knowledge transfer can yield further gains for fully
ﬁne-tuned models. For instance, Phang et al. (2018)
sequentially ﬁne-tune a pre-trained language model
on a compatible intermediate task before target
task ﬁne-tuning. It has been shown that this is most
effective for low-resource target tasks, however,
not all task combinations are beneﬁcial and many
yield decreased performances (Phang et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2019a; Pruksachatkun et al., 2020).
The abundance of diverse labeled datasets as well
as the continuous development of new pre-trained
LMs calls for methods that efﬁciently identifyin-
termediate dataset that beneﬁt the target task.
So far, it is unclear how adapter-based ap-
proaches behave with intermediate ﬁne-tuning. In
the ﬁrst part of this work, we thus establish that
this setup results in similar gains for adapters, as
has been shown for full model ﬁne-tuning (Phang
et al., 2018; Pruksachatkun et al., 2020; Gururan-
gan et al., 2020). Focusing on a low-resource target
task setup, we ﬁnd that only a subset of interme-
diate adapters yield positive gains, while others
hurt the performance considerably (see Table 1 and
Figure 2). Our results demonstrate that it is nec-
essary to obtain methods that efﬁciently identify
beneﬁcial intermediately trained adapters.
In the second part, we leverage the transfer re-
sults from part one to automatically rank and iden-
tify beneﬁcial intermediate tasks. With the rise
of large publicly accessible repositories for NLP
2Adapters are new weights at every layer of a pre-trained
transformer model. To ﬁne-tune a model on a downstream
task, all pre-trained transformer weights are frozen and only
the newly introduced adapter weights are trained.
arXiv:2104.08247v2  [cs.CL]  10 Sep 2021
models (Wolf et al., 2020; Pfeiffer et al., 2020a),
the chances of ﬁnding pre-trained models that yield
positive transfer gains are high. However, it is infea-
sible to brute-force the identiﬁcation of the best in-
termediate task. Existing approaches have focused
on beneﬁcial task selection for multi-task learning
(Bingel and Søgaard, 2017), full ﬁne-tuning of in-
termediate and target transformer-based LMs for
NLP tasks (Vu et al., 2020), adapter-based models
for vision tasks (Puigcerver et al., 2021) and unsu-
pervised approaches for zero-shot transfer for com-
munity question answering (Rücklé et al., 2020).
Each of these works require different types of data,
such as intermediate task data and/or intermediate
model weights, which, depending on the scenario,
are potentially not accessible.3
In this work we thus aim to address the efﬁ-
ciency aspect of transfer learning in NLP from
multiple different angles, resulting in the follow-
ing contributions: 1) We focus on adapter-based
transfer learning which is considerably more pa-
rameter (Houlsby et al., 2019) and computationally
efﬁcient than full model ﬁne-tuning (Rücklé et al.,
2021), while achieving on-par performance; 2) We
evaluate sequential ﬁne-tuning of adapter-based ap-
proaches on a diverse set of 42 intermediate and
11 target tasks (i.e. classiﬁcation, multiple choice,
question answering, and sequence tagging); 3) We
identify the best intermediate task for transfer learn-
ing, without the necessity of computational expen-
sive, explicit training on all potential candidates.
We compare different selection techniques, con-
solidating previously proposed and new methods;
4) We provide a thorough analysis of the different
techniques, available data scenarios, and task-, and
model types, thus presenting deeper insights into
the best approach for each respective setting;5) We
provide computational cost estimates, enabling in-
formed decision making for trade-offs between ex-
pense and downstream task performance.
2 Related Work
2.1 Transfer between tasks
Phang et al. (2018) show that training on interme-
diate tasks results in performance gains for many
target tasks. Subsequent work further explores the
effects on more diverse sets of tasks (Wang et al.,
3Bingel and Søgaard (2017) and Vu et al. (2020) require
access to both intermediate task data and models, Puigcerver
et al. (2021) require access to only the intermediate model,
and Rücklé et al. (2020) only to the intermediate task data.
2019a; Talmor and Berant, 2019; Liu et al., 2019a;
Sap et al., 2019; Pruksachatkun et al., 2020; Vu
et al., 2020). Wang et al. (2019a), Yogatama et al.
(2019), and Pruksachatkun et al. (2020) empha-
sizes the risks of catastrophic forgetting and neg-
ative transfer results, ﬁnding that the success of
sequential transfer varies largely when considering
different intermediate tasks.
While previous work has shown that intermedi-
ate task training improves the performance on the
target task in full ﬁne-tuning setups, we establish
that the same holds true for adapter-based training.
2.2 Predicting Beneﬁcial Transfer Sources
Automatically selecting intermediate tasks that
yield transfer gains is critical when considering
the increasing availability of tasks and models.
Proxy estimators have been proposed to evaluate
the transferability of pre-trained models towards a
target task. Nguyen et al. (2020), Li et al. (2021)
and Deshpande et al. (2021) estimate the trans-
ferability between classiﬁcation tasks by building
an empirical classiﬁer from the source and target
task label distribution. Puigcerver et al. (2021) ex-
periment with multiple model selection methods,
including kNN proxy models to estimate the target
task performance. In a similar direction, Reng-
gli et al. (2020) study proxy models based on kNN
and linear classiﬁers, ﬁnding that a hybrid approach
combination of task-aware and task-agnostic strate-
gies yields the best results.
Bingel and Søgaard (2017) ﬁnd that gradients of
the learning curves correlate with multi-task learn-
ing success. Zamir et al. (2018) build a taxon-
omy of vision tasks, giving insights into non-trivial
transfer relations between tasks. Multiple works
propose using embeddings that capture statistics,
features, or the domain of a dataset. Edwards and
Storkey (2017) leverage variational autoencoders
(Kingma and Welling, 2014) to encode all samples
of a dataset. Jomaa et al. (2019) train a dataset
meta-feature extractor that can successfully cap-
ture the domain of a dataset. Vu et al. (2020)
encode each training example of a dataset by av-
eraging over BERT’s representations of the last
layer. Rücklé et al. (2020) capture domain simi-
larity by embedding dataset examples using a sen-
tence embedding model. Achille et al. (2019) and
Vu et al. (2020) compute task embeddings based on
the Fisher Information Matrix of a probe network.
While many different methods have been pro-
posed, there lacks a direct comparison among them.
Additionally, previous work has only focus on
BERT, which we ﬁnd to behave considerably dif-
ferent to other model types such as RoBERTa for
some methods. In this work we aim to consoli-
date all methods and experiment with newer model
types to provide a more thorough perspective.
3 Adapter-Based Sequential Transfer
We present a large-scale study on adapter-based
sequential ﬁne-tuning, ﬁnding that around half of
the task combinations yield no positive gains. This
demonstrates the importance of ﬁnding approaches
that efﬁciently identify suitable intermediate tasks.
3.1 Tasks
We select QA tasks from the MultiQA repository
(Talmor and Berant, 2019) and sequence tagging
tasks from Liu et al. (2019a). Most of our clas-
siﬁcationtasks are available in the (Super)GLUE
(Wang et al., 2018, 2019b) benchmarks. We experi-
ment with multiple choice commonsense reasoning
tasks to cover a broader range of different types,
and domains. In total, we experiment with 53 tasks,
divided into 42 intermediate and 11 target tasks.4
3.2 Experimental Setup
We experiment with BERT-base (Devlin et al.,
2019) and RoBERTa-base (Liu et al., 2019b), train-
ing adapters with the conﬁguration proposed by
Pfeiffer et al. (2021a). We adopt the two-stage se-
quential ﬁne-tuning setup of Phang et al. (2018),
splitting the tasks in two disjoint subsetsS andT ,
denoted as intermediate and target tasks, respec-
tively. For each pair (s,t ) withs∈S andt∈T ,
we ﬁrst train a randomly initialized adapter on s
(keeping the base model’s parameters ﬁxed). We
then ﬁne-tune the trained adapter ont.5
For target task ﬁne-tuning, we simulate a low-
resource setup by limiting the maximum number
of training examples ont to 1000. This choice is
motivated by the observation that smaller target
tasks beneﬁt the most from sequential ﬁne-tuning
while at the same time revealing the largest per-
formance variances (Phang et al., 2018; Vu et al.,
2020). Low-resource setups, thus, reﬂect the most
beneﬁcial application setting for our transfer learn-
4The choice for our intermediate and target task split was
motivated by previous work (Sap et al., 2019; Vu et al., 2020,
inter alia). For more details see Appendix A.
5For more details please refer to Appendix B.
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Performance with RoBERTa
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Performance with BERT
RTE
COPA
R. Tomatoes
CQ
CoNLL 2003
CS QA
STS-B
DROP
Quail
BoolQ
DepRel-EWT
Figure 1: Comparison of transfer performance between
BERT and RoBERTa for the respective target tasks, pre-
trained on the 42 intermediate tasks.
ing strategy and also allow us to more thoroughly
study different transfer relations.
3.3 Results
Figure 2 shows the relative transfer gains and Ta-
ble 1 lists the absolute scores of all intermediate and
target task combinations for RoBERTa.6 We ob-
serve large variations in transfer gains (and losses)
across the different combinations. Even though
larger variances may be explained by a higher task
difﬁculty (see ‘No Transfer’ in Table 1), they also
illustrate the heterogeneity and potential of sequen-
tial ﬁne-tuning in